# Machine Culture

Levin Brinkmann,* [†1] Fabian Baumann, [†1] Jean-François Bonnefon, [†2] Maxime Derex, [†2,4] Thomas F.
Müller, [†1] Anne-Marie Nussberger, [†1] Agnieszka Czaplicka, [1] Alberto Acerbi, [3] Thomas L. Griffiths, [5]

Joseph Henrich, [6] Joel Z. Leibo, [7] Richard McElreath, [8] Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, [9] Jonathan Stray, [10] Iyad
Rahwan* [†1]


- Correspondence: [brinkmann@mpib-berlin.mpg.de; rahwan@mpib-berlin.mpg.de](mailto:brinkmann@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)

- Equal contributions


1 Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Center for Humans & Machines, Lentzeallee 94, Berlin 14195, Germany

2 Toulouse School of Economics, Esplanade de l'Université, 31080 Toulouse Cedex 06, France

3 Department of Sociology and Social Research, University of Trento, Italy

4 Institute for Advanced Study in Toulouse, Esplanade de l’Université, 31080 Toulouse Cedex 06, France

5 Department of Psychology & Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540

6 Department of Human Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 11 Divinity Ave, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

7 DeepMind Technologies Ltd, London, United Kingdom

8 Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany

9 Inria, Flowers team, Université de Bordeaux, France

10 Center for Human-Compatible Artificial Intelligence, University of California, Berkeley, USA


**Abstract:**

The ability of humans to create and disseminate culture is often credited as the single most important
factor of our success as a species. In this Perspective, we explore the notion of 'machine culture,'
culture mediated or generated by machines. We argue that intelligent machines simultaneously
transform the cultural evolutionary processes of variation, transmission, and selection. Recommender
algorithms are altering social learning dynamics. Chatbots are forming a new mode of cultural
transmission, serving as cultural models. Furthermore, intelligent machines are evolving as
contributors in generating cultural traits–from game strategies and visual art to scientific results. We
provide a conceptual framework for studying the present and anticipated future impact of machines on
cultural evolution, and present a research agenda for the study of machine culture.

## Introduction


The ability of humans to create and disseminate culture is considered the single most important factor
in our species’ dominance on earth [1] . The evolution of human culture has been the subject of
extensive study in all of the behavioral sciences, including anthropology [1], psychology [2], cognitive
science [3], biology [4], linguistics [5,6], archaeology [7], sociology [8] and economics [9] (Box 1).


Cultural evolution exhibits key Darwinian properties. Culture is shown to exhibit variation,
transmission, and selection, and evolves through the selective retention of cultural traits, as well as
nonselective processes such as drift [10] . Major shifts in any of these three Darwinian properties can
greatly impact cultural evolution. For instance, between 1300 and 1600, European culture experienced
successive major shifts due to increased exposure to Chinese technology such as gunpowder, which
changed the nature of warfare (variation) [11] ; Gutenberg’s invention of the printing press
(transmission) [12] ; and renewed interest in Classical ideas and values, such as Classical ideals of artistic
expression, during the Renaissance (selection) [13] . When such substantial changes occur, they induce
rapid and major impact on culture.


1


**Figure 1: Examples of machine culture. A** . Generation of novel cultural artifacts through
machines. **B** . Machine transmits and potentially mutates cultural artifacts. **C** . Machine selects
between different cultural artifacts. **D** . Human selects among diverse machines.


While new technologies have always affected the course of cultural evolution, in this article we argue
that intelligent machines will exert a transformative influence on cultural evolution through their
impact on all three Darwinian properties of culture: variation, transmission, and selection (Fig. 1).
This process began in the early days of the Internet with machine-based content ranking by search
engines and social media feed algorithms influencing what information people get from others. More
recently, generative algorithms have begun participating in the creation of cultural traits themselves.
We are not only observing a transformation of human culture but also its evolution into machine
culture—culture mediated or generated by machines. This article aims to provide researchers across
disciplines with a primer and a roadmap for navigating this monumental shift. As the impact of an
increasingly digital society on cultural evolution has been explored elsewhere [14], we specifically focus
on the current and potential impact of intelligent machines on cultural evolution. For the purposes of
this article, we use the terms “intelligent machines” and “artificial intelligence (AI) systems”
interchangeably, with AI referring to the science and technology that allow machines to perform tasks
that typically require human intelligence such as perceiving the environment, planning and executing
actions, and adapting by learning from data or experience [15,16] .

## Examples of machine-mediated cultural evolution


We begin by presenting empirical evidence of machine cultural evolution, setting the stage for a
detailed exploration through a framework that discusses instances where machines mediate or
generate cultural traits from a cultural evolutionary perspective. Through four pivotal examples, we
illustrate the diverse ways intelligent machines are transforming cultural evolutionary dynamics.
Generative machines, such as text-to-image algorithms, are contributing to the variety of cultural
traits. Models drawing upon reinforcement learning are pushing humans onto novel ground, for
instance in the ancient game of Go and beyond. Large language models (LLMs) are facilitating the
transmission of cultural knowledge and redefining the value of human intellectual skills. Meanwhile,
transmission pathways are rewired by recommender systems selecting what and from whom humans
learn. At first glance, the examples provided might seem to pertain to vastly different technological
areas, and to translate into a collection of unrelated effects. However, even now, machines are

beginning to integrate features from a range of the outlined technologies—reinforcement learning, for
instance, is enhancing generative AI. Furthermore, these technologies are operating on multiple
levels; generative AI not only generates novel ideas but also offers recommendations for their

refinement.


2


## Box 1: Glossary

**Culture** : information capable of affecting individuals’ behaviors that are acquired from other

individuals via social transmission

**Cultural Evolution** : the change of cultural information over time, the key properties for an
evolutionary process are variation, transmission, and selection
**Social Learning** : learning that is influenced by the observation of another individual or their
products.
**AI** : the science and technology enabling machines to perform tasks that typically require human
intelligence such as perceiving the environment, planning and executing actions, and adapting by
learning from data or experience.
**Machines** : intelligent machines. Used interchangeably with AI systems, thus referring to machines
that may possess capabilities to perceive the environment, plan and execute actions, and adapt by
learning from data or experience.
**Variation** : the existence of different cultural traits within a population. It represents the raw
material on which other processes, like selection and transmission, operate. Humans and machines
add to existing cultural variation through random and guided exploration, as well as recombination
of existing cultural traits.
**Transmission** : the process by which cultural information, such as knowledge, behaviors, traditions,
or practices, is passed from one individual to another through social learning mechanisms such as
observation or teaching.
**Selection** : the process by which certain cultural traits, practices, or ideas become more or less
prevalent within a population over time due to differential adoption.


_Cultural recombination through generative AI_


Generative AI has seen two major waves of innovation in recent years. The inception of Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) by Goodfellow et al. in 2014 enabled the algorithmic generation of
high-fidelity images [17] . GANs offered capabilities beyond the generation of lifelike images—they also
have the ability to blend or interpolate—giving birth to novel creations such as fantasy lifeforms [18] .
Subsequent advancement in 2022 saw the advent of diffusion-based text-to-image generative AI
systems such as DALL·E, Midjourney, and Stable Diffusion. These models substantially enhanced the
recombination power of these early models by generating high-resolution images conditioned on text
descriptions [19–21] . The original DALL·E, although now surpassed by other models in terms of image
quality, demonstrated such recombination capabilities impressively [19] . For instance, when prompted to
produce ‘an armchair in the shape of an avocado’, it creatively recombined these two distinct concepts
(see Fig. 2).


3


**Figure 2: Recombination of Visual Concepts** . The avocado chair, synthesized by OpenAI's
text-to-image generative AI, DALL·E, exemplifies the early stages of algorithmic cultural
recombination. By seamlessly combining previously learned concepts—avocados and chairs in this
case—the model showcases the ability to create coherent integrations of disparate elements and
demonstrates novelty through recombination.


These models can thus increase cultural variation by helping humans to produce new and relevant
recombinations, which are sometimes recognized as works of art, sold at prestigious auction houses [22] .
While recombination oftentimes forms the foundation of human creativity [23], it is still debated how, or
even if, machines can generate relevant content beyond the boundaries of human culture. Even simple
latent representations can disentangle the semantic meaning of linguistic concepts [24] . Similarly,
text-to-image models use language as a cognitive tool to disentangle and consequently recombine
visual concepts [25] . However, these models build upon concepts harvested from human culture. As
such, text-to-image models may be limited to the concepts defined and demonstrated by humans in the
underlying dataset. However, generative AI models can produce novel "future art" by forecasting
future art movements and by deliberately avoiding classification into established artistic
movements—such creations have been evaluated as more creative than prestigious contemporary
works by human artists [26] . When applied to engineering, similar methods can lead to the discovery of
designs that are both novel and superior [27] .


Generative AI exemplifies the dual nature of machines as both cultural artifacts and creators thereof.
On the one hand, generative algorithms are increasingly presented and, to some extent, recognized as
authors of art [22] . Simultaneously, machines are subjected to cultural processes of comparison,
distribution, modification, and eventual abandonment.


_Cultural innovation through reinforcement learning_


In 2016, AlphaGo defeated Lee Sedol, the world champion Go player, with a series of four victories
over five games. Remarkably, AlphaGo managed to surprise Sedol with distinctively nonhuman
gameplay. In particular, move 37 in the second game was considered extremely unconventional,


4


estimated by AlphaGo itself to have a 1 in 10,000 chance of being made by a human [28] (see Fig. 3.A).
AlphaGo’s unconventional gameplay likely originated in its self-play training: While its training
started with reproducing human gameplay from a large database, AlphaGo also trained through
self-play, selecting promising but uncertain moves and evaluating their success against itself [29] .
Thereby, it iteratively improved and developed novel game strategies. It was one of these innovative,
self-trained strategies that took Lee Sedol by surprise. As it turned out, it was not even necessary for
the model to start from learning human gameplay at all. The successor of AlphaGo, named AlphaGo
Zero, ignored all of the accumulated Go knowledge of humankind [29] . Starting from a blank slate, it not
only rediscovered human Go strategies but also developed strategies that surpassed those of its human


against Go world champion Lee Sedol, made a highly unusual and strategic 37th move by placing

its stone further from the edge, towards the center of the board, deviating from the traditional
strategy of securing territory along the periphery during the early stages of the game. With this
unconventional move, AlphaGo not only broke with centuries-old Go traditions but also paved the
way for its ultimate victory in the match. **B** (reproduction based on [30] ) Decision quality of
professional Go players as evaluated by an algorithm performing at superhuman level. Decision
quality significantly increased after Lee Sedol was beaten by AlphaGo on March 15, 2016 (shaded
area).


The innovations generated by AlphaGo and AlphaGo Zero soon entered human culture, as shown by
research comparing human gameplay before and after the algorithms’ introduction [30] . The decision
quality, as measured by an open-source variant of AlphaGo Zero, showed very little improvement in
human gameplay from 1950 to 2016, followed by a sudden improvement after the introduction of
AlphaGo in March 2016 [31,32] (see Fig. 3.B). However, this improvement wasn’t solely due to humans
adopting strategies developed by AlphaGo. It also reflected an unexpected shift, wherein humans
started developing moves that were qualitatively distinct both from previous human moves and from
the novel moves introduced by AlphaGo. In summary, AlphaGo served as an early, quantifiable
exemplar of machine culture, generating novel cultural variations through genuine, nonhuman
innovation. This was followed by a major transition into an even broader range of traits as the result
of humans building on the previous discoveries made by machines. As the methods underpinning
AlphaGo have been generalized to other games and extended to scientific problems, we anticipate a
continued infusion of machine-generated discoveries across diverse domains of human culture [33,34] .


5


_Language models transmit and revalue cultural knowledge_


The release of ChatGPT, a widely accessible LLM, has revolutionized how we interact with machines,
using it to learn, brainstorm, and refine ideas. Trained on extensive human text data, both historical
and contemporary, LLMs act as models of human culture [25], facilitating cultural transmission across
individuals and generations. In due course, students began requesting LLMs to complete their
homework [35] ; knowledge workers used LLMs (at their own peril) to automatically extract and
summarize required content [36] ; and software developers widely adopted LLMs as powerful
code-writing assistants [37] . LLMs not only serve as content creators but also, for better or worse, act as
reservoirs of knowledge and providers of learning opportunities. Thereby, ChatGPT exemplifies
social learning from machines.


As the capabilities and usages of LLMs continue to develop, the value of certain human skills will
shift. Some skills may lose value quickly, especially in language-related and cognitively demanding
occupations such as translation, copywriting, or proofreading [38] . Occupations with more creative uses
of language may follow, given that LLMs may soon surpass the creativity of humans as measured by
standardized tests [39] . Even though not all occupations will be affected in the short-term, a recent
survey projects that around 20% of the workforce will experience LLMs impacting at least half of
their tasks [38] . It is important to note, however, that this projection is an early estimate and as such
inherently uncertain in its accuracy and reliability. Meanwhile, other skills may gain in value — for
instance, skills that allow efficient collaboration with LLMs, such as prompt engineering (i.e., the
skilful writing of instructions to get LLMs to do what we want) [40] . Consequently, human creativity is
experiencing a remarkable shift [41] . It is not merely focused on generating final outputs but is
increasingly evolving towards interactions with machines, progressing from explicit prompts to more
natural conversations [42] . Workers who invest in related skills may outperform workers who do not,
potentially accelerating the adoption of LLMs and further increasing the value of knowing how to

collaborate with them.


_Cultural rewiring through recommender systems_


The digital age is so data-rich that it has become increasingly hard for humans to navigate available
information. In this abundance, recommender systems that manage and filter information have a silent
but increasingly important role that is easily overlooked given how seamlessly these systems have
integrated into our everyday digital lives. These systems select and prioritize items based on a variety
of explicit and implicit features, including personal interests, control settings, past user behavior, and
the behavior of similar users. While recommender systems do not add variation in cultural traits, they
demonstrably impact the selective retention and transmission of cultural traits.


6


**Figure 4: Exemplary instances of cultural rewiring.** Top panels represent the user interfaces,
bottom panels provide a schematic depiction of the underlying mechanism. **A** Friendship
recommendation on an online platform (e.g., X or LinkedIn). A new social tie (person A) is
recommended to the green user. **B** Collaborative filtering for item recommendations. The
recommender system suggests a book to the right user based on the correlations in co-purchases of
other items (movie and music album) by the left user.


By promoting new social ties—such as suggesting who to follow on X (formerly Twitter), to date on
Tinder, or to work with on LinkedIn—recommender systems alter the people to whom we are exposed
to, ultimately changing the structure of our social networks and hence pathways of cultural
transmission [43] (see Fig. 4.A). But recommender systems can also bypass network structures, exerting
an even more direct impact on which cultural content or products we are exposed to. For example,
e-commerce websites and streaming platforms deploy recommender systems to steer customers
through the expansive array of available products based on content and collaborative filtering. Content
filtering matches information about a customer’s consumption history with the attributes of all
available products to make suggestions about related purchases: a customer who has recently
purchased running shoes may receive suggestions for additional running equipment, matched to the
shoes in price and design [44] . Meanwhile, collaborative filtering [45] makes recommendations based on
less obvious patterns of correlations in users’ profiles: if users A and B overlap in their previously
consumed movies and music, the recommender system might suggest content of a completely
different kind, for example, recommending to user A a book that user B liked (see Fig. 4.B). In sum,
recommender systems influence cultural evolution by rewiring our social networks and modifying
information flows such that they can substantially influence the dynamics of cultural markets [46–48] .


7


## A framework for machine-mediated cultural evolution

Building on these exemplary instances of how machine technologies may impact cultural evolution,
we will now map out a systematic framework for studying the potential of machines to shape cultural
evolutionary processes.


Culture has been defined as information capable of affecting individuals’ behaviors that is acquired
from other individuals via social transmission [49] . Consequently, the science of cultural evolution
examines the change of cultural information over time [50,51] . Cultural information is represented by
individual cultural traits, which can exist as cognitive representations or be expressed in behaviors or
artifacts [52] . Culture evolves according to a similar process by which species change, that is, through
the selective retention of cultural traits and through other nonselective processes, such as drift [10] .
While there are ongoing discussions on how far the analogy between cultural and genetic evolution
should be pushed [53,54], there is general agreement that culture exhibits the key properties of
evolutionary systems that are Variation, Transmission, and Selection. These properties are not
necessarily the result of distinct processes of human cognition and behavior, yet they offer a useful
framework to analyze the multifaceted ways machines can influence cultural evolution (see Table 1
for a summary).


Variation refers to the existence of different cultural traits within a population. Transmission involves
the spread of cultural information from one individual to another through social learning mechanisms,
including observation and teaching. During this transmission, information losses often occur, affecting
the preservation of cultural traits. Selection occurs when certain cultural traits are more likely to be
adopted by individuals due to factors such as their usefulness, popularity, or compatibility with
existing cultural practices. Crucially, the prevalence of specific traits over time can be influenced by
both their selection and variations in transmission fidelity, contingent on the traits’ characteristics. We
anticipate that machine technologies will affect each of these three properties(see Fig. 4), which are
likely to have transformative impacts on cultural evolution.


8


**Table 1.** Tentative conjectures about ways in which machines might shape the processes of cultural
evolution.


**Machine Capability** **Possible Impact on Culture**



**Variation** Learning at unprecedented scale and speed
(e.g., reinforcement learning)



Emergence of solutions culturally alien to

humans



Superhuman model complexity Generation of solutions inconceivable by
collective human intelligence and human

cultural evolution


Incomparably broad and deep knowledge base Creation of novel recombinations beyond the


human horizon



(Semi-)autonomous creativity (e.g., image
generation models)


**Transmission** Exposing and/or preserving documented
cultural knowledge (e.g., LLM chatbots)



Facilitation or crowding out human
participation in creative exploration


Enhanced retrieval and increased

transmission fidelity of documented cultural
knowledge



Reproduction of human biases Amplification or mitigation of existing biases;
potential for increased cultural erosion


Accelerated processing of empirical evidence Facilitation of transmission of less
compressed knowledge



Leveraging the unique cognitive capabilities of

both humans and machines


**Selection** Recommendation of social ties (e.g., link
recommendation algorithm)


Curating content (e.g., ranking algorithms,
collaborative filtering)



Expanding the collective capacity to maintain

diverse cultural artifacts


Shaping social networks, potentially
inhibiting or enhancing serendipitous

encounters


Indirectly shaping social networks via content

exposure


Shaping incentives for human content
creators (e.g., clickbait)



Adapting to human feedback (e.g., RLHF) Alignment of machines to human goals,
potentially leading to unintended
consequences (e.g., spread of highly
believable myths)



Machine learning from machine-generated

content


Adaptability of AI models to market/societal

demands


Competing with humans in cultural production
(e.g., poetry)



Selection of machine-generated content as

main driver of cultural evolution


Proliferation of appealing apps with varying
alignment to human welfare


Specialization of humans and machines in

distinct niches



9


_Variation_


Variation refers to the presence of diverse cultural traits within a population. Humans and machines
contribute to this existing cultural variation through both random and guided exploration, as well as
the recombination of existing cultural traits. However, machines, leveraging their unique capacities,
can produce traits distinct from those produced by humans, thus potentially steering culture toward
new paths.


Machines have the ability to learn individually at an unparalleled scale, enabling the discovery of
novel cultural traits through extensive exploration. Thorough exploration is not unique to machines.
Thomas Edison, for example, famously tested over 6,000 materials to find the most suitable filament
for his incandescent light bulb [55] . However, the computational speed of humans imposes time
constraints that limit their exploration compared to machines [56] . For instance, AlphaGo Zero needed
only three days to play 4.9 million games against itself, achieving a superhuman level of proficiency

29 . No human can amass that volume of experience individually; hence, we tend to rely heavily on
preexisting, culturally evolved solutions that are socially learned [57,58] . This approach narrows the
scope of innovation to the cultural context of previous generations. AI systems like AlphaGo use
reinforcement learning—based on iterative rounds of trial and error—and hence can transcend this
cultural path dependency by starting from a blank slate and discovering innovative solutions through
exploration alone [59] . As a result, AI systems have the potential to generate culturally alien traits. In
this respect, AlphaGo is in stark contrast to language models, which primarily learn to reproduce
human cultural output.


Machines and humans employ guiding models—policies—that aid in efficiently exploring complex
solution spaces, thereby enabling the discovery of solutions that would be unobtainable through
random exploration alone. For instance, Mesoamerican skywatchers, via an early example of human
astronomic modeling, developed a policy for optimal seed planting times, maximizing agricultural
productivity [60] . Similar to humans, algorithms like AlphaGo utilize complex policies to guide their
search. The general approach to guided search is similar for both humans and machines: experience is
used to update a predictive model of the world, which then informs actions that generate new
experiences. Machines no longer require humans to explicitly formulate these guiding models.
Instead, general-purpose neural networks are universal approximators, allowing functional
relationships to be learned [61,62] . This allows for unprecedented model complexity and consequently
pushes the boundary of attainable solutions [63] . Surpassing the capabilities of any human-conceived
model, the neural network-based algorithm AlphaFold has achieved remarkable precision in modeling
intramolecular relations, enabling it to tackle one of molecular biology's greatest challenges:
predicting a protein's three-dimensional structure based solely on its DNA sequence [64] . For centuries,
protein structure prediction has drawn substantial intellectual contributions from scientists, even
harnessing the collective intelligence of tens of thousands of citizen scientists [65] . Nevertheless,
AlphaFold’s complex model of intramolecular relations, manifested in the form of a deep neural
network, proved superior, eclipsing these extensive human efforts with remarkable proficiency.


Many contemporary algorithms, such as LLMs, have been trained on a cultural repertoire of
unprecedented scale [66] . For instance, some LLMs are trained on hundreds of billions of words [67] .
While size does not guarantee diversity [68], the degree to which machines can learn from human
culture repertoires far exceeds what can be achieved by a single human being, allowing, for instance,
individual language models to cover a broad spectrum of languages comprehensively [69] . By
combining knowledge from disjointed communities—spanning cultural and geographic contexts,


10


language barriers, or scientific disciplines—intelligent machines can produce novel recombinations
that may be beyond humanity’s reach. Irrespective of whether LLMs truly exhibit understanding [70],
the mere recombination of cultural traits can lead to innovation and fuel cultural evolution [68,71] .

Indeed, recombination is considered central to generating novel cultural traits [23,68,72–74] . Another way in
which intelligent machines may increase the variety of cultural traits is by building on human
knowledge while at the same time identifying and deliberately avoiding common human pathways.
For instance, in the realm of scientific discoveries, intelligent machines may be designed to uncover
scientifically plausible and promising “alien” hypotheses that would normally fall outside the focal
point of contemporary scientific communities [75] . This does not imply, however, that intelligent
machines are without their own limitations or blind spots, as we will discuss later.


But machines may also augment human exploration. Conditional generative AI, like DALL-E, allows
users to steer the generative process through text prompts, enabling experimentation with diverse
concepts and visualizations without the need for advanced artistic skills [19] . Throughout human history,
the effective size of the population that contributed to the creation and maintenance of cultural
knowledge has constrained human cultural evolution [1] . Technology has had a varying impact on
human cultural activities. On the one hand, it can democratize behavior. For instance, advancements

in digital cameras and editing software have enabled individuals with limited technical knowledge to
capture high-quality photographs and edit them effectively. On the other hand, the advent of new
technologies can lead to increasingly specialized roles for humans. For instance, visual effects
technology has led to the emergence of entirely new professions in film production, contributing to a
cumulative increase in crew size [76] . Lastly, technological advancements can also lead to a reduction in
human engagement in certain activities. For example, the advent of farming decreased the necessity
for hunting, as people could grow food instead. It is yet to be seen whether the proliferation of
increasingly intelligent machines will follow a similar trajectory. Will it democratize and increase
human participation in creative fields, will it lead to new professions and increasing specialization, or
could it lead to a decline in human-led creative expression, as we become increasingly reliant on
intelligent machines [41] ? Undoubtedly, human cultural exploration, in science as in arts, will
increasingly be in collaboration with machines [77,78] .


_Transmission_


The transmission of cultural information occurs via social learning, defined as learning that is
influenced by the observation of another individual and/or its products [57] . This is in contrast to
individual learning, where information is acquired, for instance, through trial and error. In humans,
social learning tends to be imperfect, which means that transmission events are associated with a risk
of losing cultural information. For example, if individuals observe a behavior incorrectly or do not
fully understand it, they may not pass on the correct information to others. Over time, this can lead to
the deterioration or even loss of cultural practices, which can have lasting consequences for a
population.


Intelligent machines will increasingly be involved in the preservation and transmission of cultural
information. Cultural evolution has supplied humans with increasingly efficient tools to preserve
cultural information. The invention of writing, for instance, allowed humans to mitigate cultural loss
by recording information in a more permanent way. Theoretical and empirical studies of cultural
evolution have shown that the stability of cultural information strongly depends on both the size of the
population that shares information [72] and the type of social learning mechanisms involved (with lower
fidelity when transmission relies on mere observation than when it relies on verbal teaching, for


11


instance) [79] . Besides serving as a persistent medium of cultural storage analogous to a book, machines
can learn to seek and transmit information [78,80] and can act as conversational and pedagogical agents,
similar to teachers [81] . This dual role has potential for drastically boosting cultural preservation by
reducing cultural drift. For instance, LLMs have been harnessed to resurrect historical figures [82] and to
revive languages teetering on the edge of extinction [83] . By fostering interactive cultural experiences
for learners, these technologies can enhance the comprehension and retention of cultural information


84

.


As machines store and transmit cultural information, they may reproduce and transmit biases inherent
to human culture, for example through biased training datasets; but they also offer potential to
mitigate those. Machine learning models reproduce various content biases inherent to their training
data, including gender bias, racial or ethnic bias, bias for negative and threat-related information, and
socioeconomic bias [68,85–89] . For instance, many LLMs make implicit assumptions about the gender
associated with professions like nurse and doctor, reflecting the demographic perspective dominant in
the training data [90] . When an LLM is used for revision and enhancement of human-written text, it can
transmit and/or reinforce these biases [68] . Numerous strategies exist to address bias and fairness in
machine learning models [91] . For instance, the demographic representation in the outputs of LLMs can
be improved by using prompts featuring personas from a broad demographic spectrum [92] . However,
LLMs present another challenge: they struggle to accurately represent languages and communities for
which there is limited training data [68,93] . This limitation implies that LLM-based copy-editing could
inadvertently lead to cultural erosion within these underrepresented communities due to losses in text
reproduction. Nevertheless, LLMs, with their capacity to handle vast quantities of training data, can
contribute to the preservation and even enhancement of cultural diversity, provided that the training
data is carefully curated with attention to diversity and representation.


Cultural transmission can be impacted not only by the replication of biases but also by disparities
between human and algorithmic biases. Examples of biases found in humans are confirmation bias [94],
availability bias [95], and a bias towards specific symmetries [96] . Despite their reputation for undermining
optimal decision-making, biases can actually reflect optimal decisions within a particular
socio-environmental context under cognitive constraints such as memory, computation, or experience

97–100 . Similarly, machines may seize biases -- for instance, deep learning architectures assume spatial
symmetries to improve training efficiency [94] . Importantly, humans and machines operate under
different cognitive constraints [56] and inhabit distinct socio-environmental contexts. This may give rise
to idiosyncratic biases. For instance, due to their enhanced computational capabilities, machines may
display more utilitarian rationality [90] . Remarkably, humans often anticipate more utilitarian behavior
from them [102] and might indeed, as we will elaborate in the following section, enhance this tendency.
Irrespective of their origin, the effects of biases on culture tend to strengthen through repeated
transmission [98,103,104] . This can restrict the spectrum of solutions that a population can derive, and even
highly effective solutions may not be sustained if they conflict with pre-existing biases [105] . As such,
the increased cognitive diversity—for instance with regard to biases—within human-machine
societies has the potential to expand the collective capacity to maintain diverse cultural artifacts.
Artifacts that might not be maintained by humans could potentially be maintained by machines.
Conversely, in the transmission between humans and machines, a misalignment of biases can increase
the risk of information loss [106] .


Machines' increased computational capacity might additionally affect the feasibility of accumulating
uncompressed information via a “big data” approach. The compressibility of information is the


12


inverse of its algorithmic complexity: Compressing information is achieved by creating a rule that is
shorter than a complete list of the data itself [107] . Compression is a key feature of both human cognition
and machine learning [108] ; any information-processing system must address a general trade-off between
a truthful representation of the “raw” information and constraints on computation. The extent and
nature of these constraints, however, differ between humans and machines [56] . Compression processes
have an important role in human transmission to mitigate cultural loss: Raw information oftentimes is
not learnable because it is too complex, whereas a compressed rule might very well be. Human
language, for example, retains its expressivity by becoming learnable via the evolution of compressed
structure [109] . Similarly, scientists develop, transmit, and revise theories as compressed representations
of knowledge. Machine learning has the potential to reduce some of the constraints resulting from
human computation, as the amount of data that can be processed is vastly increased. Consequently,
information might be increasingly transmitted with low compression – in the form of “big data” –
when predictive power is of ultimate importance and for some applications, the necessity to derive
and transmit highly compressed rules or theories might be reduced [110,111] . For instance, with the advent
of AlphaFold, scientists might focus on collecting and preserving further ground truth data on
molecule structures to refine future models rather than refining and transmitting theories of atomic
interactions. While symbolic representations may remain crucial for efficient computation,
algorithmic-assisted discovery could lessen the need for their transmission, as these representations
could be easily regenerated [112] . However, theories may retain importance in shaping human
understanding and intuition, serving as essential tools for conceptualizing knowledge—a function that
the framework we present in this work aims to fulfill.


_Selection_


Culture evolves in part through the selective retention of cultural traits. In the context of machine
culture, selection can occur at a level where machines select what and from whom humans learn, at a

level where humans select machine behavior, and at a level where there is selection between humans

and machines.


When it comes to what humans learn, social learning strategies shape what, when, and whom we
copy. These strategies can be broadly categorized into content- and context-based strategies [113,114] :
content-based strategies consider what is learned, favoring—for instance—social over nonsocial
information [115] . Conversely, context-based strategies attend to situational features, focusing on
properties of a cultural model (e.g., their competence, success, prestige, knowledge, similarity),
frequencies (e.g., most common behavior, rare behavior), or internal states of the learner (e.g.,
uncertainty, the cost of individual learning). Machines that help humans to navigate vast information
spaces by (pre-)selecting cultural traits often reflect such social learning strategies.


For instance, content-based filtering algorithms aim to maximize the similarity between items a user
previously showed interest in and unobserved items. Emulating context-based strategies in selection,
ranking algorithms typically sort items according to a relevance score, which is based on the items’
popularity [116,117] . Concurrently, collaborative filtering (CF) algorithms detect hidden patterns between
items and users, achieving recommendations about novel items to similar users without using
additional exogenous information about individual items or users [118] (see Fig. 4B).


Another dimension along which algorithms may influence the selective retention of cultural traits
pertains to social networks, which form the backbone of information exchange. In this context, social


13


ties are rewired as users follow algorithmic recommendations based on user attributes, such as
popularity, or similarities in user preferences both in personal (X: “who to follow”) and professional
domains (LinkedIn “People you might know”). Link recommendation algorithms have the potential to
shape the overall evolution of social networks [119–121] . X’s “who to follow” recommendation was
observed to disproportionately benefit those users who were already the most popular, fueling “the
rich get richer” dynamics [121] . A growing body of research documents a complex but persistent and
critical relationship between social networks’ structure and collectives’ ability to collaborate,
coordinate, and solve problems [122–124] that ultimately shape cultural repertoires [73,125] .


While machines have most commonly relied on exploiting explicit user preferences and historical
behavior (e.g., ratings, engagement), there has been a growing interest in considering users' internal
states to improve algorithmic recommendations. For instance, users might be uncertain about their
preferences -- especially in domains in which they lack expertise. Bayesian approaches can model
users’ uncertainty and be used to update algorithmic recommendations as the user interacts with the
system [126] . As another example, recommender systems might account for the cognitive cost of
exploring items or learning about them by prioritizing items that are easier for users to evaluate or
learn [127] . Affective recommender systems [128] use techniques such as natural language processing to
make inferences about users’ emotional states, and even combine them with other context information
such as the recommendation domain (e.g., music or movies) [129–131] . While recommender systems have
so far been mostly shaping user preferences implicitly (e.g., by optimizing the position or ranking of
content), LLMs may accelerate developments where users are increasingly persuaded explicitly
through interactive argumentation.


Downstream consequences of selection by machines may often be specific to particular environments,
algorithmic models, and feedback loops. However, one feature generalizing across various contexts is
that algorithms–by design of underlying business models–are often geared towards maximizing user
engagement for profit [132] . In social networks, this may be achieved by promoting content congruent
with users’ past engagement or ingroup attitudes [133], or content that humans inherently attend to, such
as emotionally and morally charged content [134,135] . One example for this is information that relates to
threat or elicits disgust, as shown in transmission chain experiments inspired from cultural
evolutionary theory [136] . The algorithmic amplification of such content may then feed back into human
social learning, for instance inflating beliefs about the normative value of expressing moral outrage

137,138, increasing out-group animosity 139, or by creating echo chambers and filter bubbles 140–142 . It is
important to note that user engagement is a signal of value to both users and platforms deploying
algorithms, connecting them in complex feedback loops [143,144] : machines such as recommender
systems react to user engagement, selecting types of content people engage with. Users also react to
recommender systems, both directly in terms of clicking, viewing, purchasing but also in terms of
what they produce, as content creators anticipate what will receive the widest distribution. These
feedback loops, but also deliberate product design choices along with policy approaches, provide
potent leverage points for aligning recommender systems with human values [145] . A promising
approach to addressing this challenge could involve considering potential misalignments between
users’ engagement and their own preferences and identifying the boundary conditions determining
when maximizing user engagement enhances user welfare and when it produces the opposite effect

146 . Algorithmic systems more generally offer powerful ways to bridge social divides, for instance by
designing selection policies that steer users’ attention to content that increases mutual understanding
and trust [147,148], or by identifying and promoting links in social networks that can effectively mitigate


14


polarizing dynamics [149,150] . Machine selection can also be deliberately geared towards fostering
content diversity [151], or towards maximizing agreement among humans with diverse preferences [152] .


Human preferences, in turn, can directly shape machine behavior, in particular through reinforcement
learning with human feedback (RLHF) [153,154] . One way to conceptualize this is by viewing machines
as students that generate arrays of solutions, with humans acting as teachers who select the most
suitable ones. This process can nudge machines towards desirable properties like helpfulness, honesty,
and harmlessness [154] . However, harvesting human annotators' preferences at scale through RLHF can
induce machines to adopt behaviors unintended by the deploying organizations, exemplified by
chatbots that increasingly endorse inflated political views or express a heightened desire to avoid
shutdown [155] . Human influence on machine behavior also occurs through more subtle pathways:
through training on human text alone LLMs picked up a tendency to repeat users’ stated views [155] .
Machines’ attention to human feedback may create selection pressures towards pleasing human
interlocutors. For instance, humans may favor machines catering to non-factual stories and narratives
that match concepts and ideas preferred by human cognition [156], such as those appealing to intuitive
expectations about the natural world [157,158], or to specific religious practices [159] .


Humans select machine behavior also through direct creation and curation of training data for
machine learning, and through more indirect interactions with machine-generated outputs. Despite
efforts to watermark machine-created content [160], machine and human-made content will increasingly
intertwine [161] . For instance, it is estimated that many supposedly human-written texts on
crowdsourcing platforms are already augmented by machines [162] . Consequently, it seems inevitable
that future machines will be trained on mixed human-machine content, forming part of a larger
feedback cycle between content generation and selection. The human element in this cycle may prove
crucial, for instance in preventing ‘model collapse’ -- a dynamic where repeated training on
machine-generated data narrows its outputs to very few traits [161] . This phenomenon stems from a
classification bias that favors more prevalent classes [163], a bias that is amplified through successive
iterations of learning [164] . By contrast, when encountering similar challenges, human culture might
preserve diversity by utilizing biases with counteracting effects, such as endorsing local conformity

165 . That said, it seems likely that machines could recover similar strategies to maintain cultural
diversity without human involvement.


Yet another pathway for human selection on machine behavior pertains to general machine properties.
For instance, humans may choose between different intelligent machines available on the market
based on factors such as preferences, cost, usefulness, harmfulness, and alignment with regulatory
requirements. As such, the language model LLaMA recently gained attention for its relatively smaller
size, making it more cost-effective to use [166] . Conversely, ChatGPT outperformed many comparable
models due to its superior accessibility and helpfulness [154] . Human demands towards machines are
likely to change over time, shaping the trajectory of machine culture similar to other historic cases
where technologies evolved in response to changing human demands (e.g., the wheel from wooden
wheels on carriages to rubber tires on automobiles). Crucially, if intelligent machines are designed and
evaluated by non-representative experts, these systems run the risk of unintentionally reproducing and
intensifying the biases inherent to their selectors [167] .


Selection is also bound to occur at a level where machines or humans are favored over one another.

For instance, the ability of machines to process vast amounts of information both quickly and
accurately affords them a competitive edge in numerous cognitive tasks, such as strategic gameplay


15


and information retrieval. Relatedly, due to their cost-effectiveness and efficiency, intelligent
machines may grow into the main workforce across various professional domains [38,168] . However,
analogous to how the invention of the car did not diminish interest in running as a sport, the
proliferation of machines may not curtail human interest in intellectual pursuits; instead, it might
redirect the focus from necessity to leisure and entertainment. Meanwhile, across various contexts,
humans might favor other humans over machines due to their shared experience. For instance, even
though present-day machines can conceive messages perceived as more empathic than messages
conceived by humans [169,170], such messages may be perceived differently once recipients become
aware of their artificial origin. This phenomenon, which could be referred to as the “artificial empathy
paradox” [171] may, at least in part, arise from the very fact that empathizing is effortful for humans [172]

and that, as such, it conveys a motivational social signal to others that is made void by
machine-involvement. Selection between humans and machines does not imply that one agent
dominates over the other in any cultural niche; oftentimes, one will augment -- rather than fully
replace -- the other; other times, the presence of the other may trigger the development of new skills,

or roles.

## Grand challenges and open questions


We now suggest a broad research agenda for computational and behavioral scientists interested in the
phenomenon of Machine Culture.


_Measurement_


One major open challenge is to quantify how much of human cultural dynamics can be attributable to
algorithmic processes. For instance, it is difficult to completely disentangle the effects of ranking and
recommendation algorithms on culture from alternative processes of human social learning, such as
communication technology, institutions, and social practices. Since the inception of human culture,
derived tools have had an important role in shaping cultural processes, making the establishment of a
baseline a challenging question in itself. Getting good estimates is a precondition to optimizing for the
usefulness of these algorithms while avoiding undesirable cultural impact such as polarizations [173] .
This challenge is reflected in research on “filter bubbles”, which has moved from considering
algorithmic curation as decisive force shaping online engagement [141] towards acknowledging the
influence of users’ own choices on social media ranking algorithms [174] and search engines [175] ; thus
highlighting the intricate feedback loops between machine and human decisions. While we hope that
it will be possible to find appropriate metrics for the cultural impact of machines, the intricacy of this
problem qualifies it as an open grand challenge.


A complementary question is how to quantify the influence of machine-generated artifacts – e.g.,
artwork, literature, music – on human cultural production in these areas. As generative AI becomes
more commonplace, distinguishing intrinsic human culture from machine-generated culture or
machine-influenced culture becomes even more challenging, especially as watermarking techniques
may not be universally adopted. Despite popular media claims about machine-generated art
developing its own unique style [176], we do not yet have a reliable way of verifying these claims, let
alone assessing machine-to-human cultural transmission [106] .


Another measurement concern relates to the quantification of the cultural regularities encoded in
LLMs and other AI models. Even prior to the rise of LLMs, social media platforms like Facebook


16


already possessed fairly detailed quantitative models of cultural regularities and differences [177],
developed mainly for the purpose of marketing to particular demographics. However, as LLMs are
trained from curated datasets, and fine-tuning using human feedback, quantifying the biases that are
introduced and/or mitigated by these models is crucial [178,179] .


_Societal Decision-making_


We currently observe a rapid increase in the diversity of AI models, including LLMs, accelerated by
the open-source software movement. However, market forces, such as regulation and market power,
may result in a world dominated by a small number of monolithic models. This raises the possibility
of reduction in cultural diversity, as major social, political, and economic forces try to shape global
machine culture to match their preferences. This process may be amplified by feedback loops, in
which LLMs train on an ongoing basis from synthetic data, or from human data that contains much
machine-generated text. Preliminary evidence points to the possibility of model collapse, with the
models losing diversity and converging to a state with low variance [161] .


Conversely, we face a potential 'Tower of Babel' scenario. As AI models become increasingly
personalized, conforming to and reinforcing our individual worldviews, they risk engendering an
unprecedented fragmentation of our shared perception of the world. In the biblical story (Genesis
11:1-9), the construction of the tower led to a divine intervention that scattered humanity and
confounded languages. Drawing a parallel, if we continually interact with machines that echo and
affirm our preconceived notions, we risk isolating ourselves within ideologically and culturally
homogenous echo chambers. Such fragmentation can stifle meaningful dialogue, breed
misunderstanding, and, ultimately, fracture our shared future vision.


Against this background, a key research agenda is to quantify the degree to which a given AI model,
or ecosystem of models, exhibits uniformity or diversity. It is also imperative to understand what
constitutes a ‘healthy’ level of diversity, that retains local sovereignty while also fostering collective
human flourishing.


Ensuring that AI models, such as LLMs, reflect the beliefs and values of a given community requires
mechanisms for societal decision-making about what knowledge goes into the models [180] .
Furthermore, humans exhibit variation in their ethical expectations towards machines, both within and
across cultures [181] . This raises questions about how to best aggregate diverse, potentially conflicting
preferences to arrive at an agreeable outcome [182] . A number of interesting ideas are emerging, from
voting on different algorithmic policy-makers [183] to utilizing LLMs to summarize diverse human
opinions [184] and generate consensus statements [152] .


A related challenge is how to ensure long-term monitoring of Machine Culture. Similar to the notion
of human-in-the-loop control of intelligent machines, we can aspire towards society-in-the-loop
control of the complex phenomena of Machine Culture [185] .


Suppose a community knows which cultural beliefs and values it wants to encode in an AI model. The
next question is how to ensure that these are indeed present in the model. One approach is to carefully
curate the dataset on which the model is trained [186,187] . Another, increasingly used approach is
fine-tuning based on RLHF [188] . Yet another approach is to fine-tune using constitutional rules
provided by humans [189] . The relative merits and drawbacks of these various approaches are still not


17


well understood. There is a need for methods to check which cultural beliefs and values have been

learned, inferred, or encoded in a given AI model and the degree to which it aligns with a target

culture.


_Long-term Dynamics & Optimization_


In all likelihood, the future of culture will be hybrid, with cultural artifacts–scientific theories,
industrial processes, art, literature–being created by a combination of human and machine
intelligence. This raises a suite of open questions relating to the long-term dynamics of
human-machine co-evolution. These dynamics may lead to diverse phenomena ranging from different
forms of human-machine mutualism, to Red Queen effects (an evolutionary arms race between
humans and machines) that characterize the co-evolution of both forms of intelligence [190] .


A related question is how to optimize the aforementioned dynamics, in order to combine human and
machine intelligence in an ideal or safe manner [75] . This may be relevant to questions of risk
mitigation. Although experts disagree on the timescales and the degree of risk involved, the potential
of superhuman Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) poses a possible existential threat to the human
species [191] . Cultural evolution provides a useful framework for navigating this challenge. Specifically,
cultural evolution processes take place today at multiple scales, with human collectives–e.g.,
companies, universities, institutions, cities, nation-states–acting as the units of selection [192] . This
multi-level selection can, in principle, operate at the level of human organizations augmented by
intelligent machines and (eventually) superhuman AGI. Engineering this evolutionary process can
provide means for ensuring human survival and agency in the long run.

## Conclusion


We asked GPT-4 to first write a compressed version of this Perspective and then to provide a
conclusion. It suggested the following (minimal editing to align nomenclature has been applied). The
symbiosis of human and machine intelligence is forging a new epoch of cultural evolution. This
Perspective highlights the transformative role of intelligent machines in reshaping creativity,
redefining skill value, and altering human interactions. Central to the discourse is the triad of cultural
evolution: variation, transmission, and selection, and how machines interface with each. The

interaction is multifaceted, from generative AI birthing novel cultural artifacts to recommendation
algorithms influencing individual perspectives. However, the crux remains in understanding and
navigating the challenges and opportunities that arise from this hybridization of culture. As the
imprints of intelligent machines grow deeper, it's imperative to ensure a harmonious co-creation of
culture where both human and machine augment, rather than eclipse, each other. This not only
broadens the horizons of cultural exploration but also fortifies the tapestry of human experience in the
age of intelligent machines.

## Author contributions


Conception: LB, IR; Manuscript preparation: LB, FB, JFB, MD, TFM, AMN, IR; Critical review,
commentary or revision: AC, AA, TLG, JH, JZL, RM, PYO, JS; Supervision: IR


18


## Acknowledgments

LB thanks Michiel Bakker for useful discussions. The authors thank Bramantyo Supriyatno for
supporting the formatting of the manuscript. The conclusion was created by GPT-4 based on a
summary (also created by GPT-4) of this manuscript with minimal editing to align nomenclature. JFB
and MD acknowledge IAST funding from the French National Research Agency (ANR) under grant
no. ANR-17-EURE-0010 (Investissements d’Avenir programme)

## Competing interests


The authors declare no competing interests.

## References


1. Henrich, J. _The Secret of Our Success: How Culture Is Driving Human Evolution,_


_Domesticating Our Species, and Making Us Smarter_ . (Princeton University Press,


2016). [https://doi.org/10.1515/9781400873296.](https://doi.org/10.1515/9781400873296)


2. Heyes, C. _Cognitive Gadgets: The Cultural Evolution of Thinking_ . (Harvard University


Press, 2018). [https://doi.org/10.4159/9780674985155.](https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.4159/9780674985155/html)


3. Thompson, B., van Opheusden, B., Sumers, T. & Griffiths, T. L. Complex cognitive


algorithms preserved by selective social learning in experimental populations. _Science_


**376** [, 95–98 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abn0915.](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abn0915)


4. Whiten, A. Cultural Evolution in Animals. _Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst._ **50**, 27–48 (2019).


[https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-ecolsys-110218-025040.](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-ecolsys-110218-025040)


5. Gray, R. D. & Atkinson, Q. D. Language-tree divergence times support the Anatolian


theory of Indo-European origin. _Nature_ **426**, 435–439 (2003).


[https://doi.org/10.1038/nature02029.](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature02029)


6. Kirby, S., Cornish, H. & Smith, K. Cumulative cultural evolution in the laboratory: An


experimental approach to the origins of structure in human language. _Proc. Natl. Acad._


_Sci._ **105**, 10681–10686 (2008). [https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0707835105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0707835105) .


7. Shennan, S. _Genes, memes, and human history: Darwinian archaeology and cultural_


_evolution_ . (Thames & Hudson, 2002). [https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003598X00061913.](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003598X00061913)


8. Kiley, K. & Vaisey, S. Measuring stability and change in personal culture using panel


19


data. _Am. Sociol. Rev._ **85**, 477–506 (2020). [https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122420921538.](https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122420921538)


9. Mokyr, J. _A Culture of Growth: The Origins of the Modern Economy_ . (Princeton


[University Press, 2017). https://doi.org/10.1515/9781400882915.](https://doi.org/10.1515/9781400882915)


10. Mesoudi, A., Whiten, A. & Laland, K. N. Perspective: Is Human Cultural Evolution


Darwinian? Evidence Reviewed From The Perspective Of The Origin Of Species.


_Evolution_ **58**, 1–11 (2004). [https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0014-3820.2004.tb01568.x.](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0014-3820.2004.tb01568.x)


11. Needham, J. Science and Civilisation in China | History of science and technology. in


_Chemistry and Chemical Technology; Pt. 7: Military Technology; The Gunpowder Epic_


vol. 5 (Cambridge University Press, 1986).


[https://doi.org/10.1017/S0035869X0016486X.](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0035869X0016486X)


12. Eisenstein, E. L. _The printing press as an agent of change_ . vol. 1 (Cambridge


[University Press, 1980). https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107049963.](https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107049963)


13. Mesoudi, A. Culture and the Darwinian Renaissance in the social sciences and


humanities: For a special issue of the _Journal of Evolutionary Psychology_, “The


Darwinian Renaissance in the Social Sciences and Humanities”. _J. Evol. Psychol._ **9**,


[109–124 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1556/jep.9.2011.29.1.](https://doi.org/10.1556/jep.9.2011.29.1)


14. Acerbi, A. _Cultural Evolution in the Digital Age_ . (Oxford University Press, 2019).


[https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198835943.001.0001.](https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198835943.001.0001)


15. Russell, S. & Norvig, P. _Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach_ . (Prentice Hall Press,


2009).


16. Kurzweil, R., Richter, R., Kurzweil, R. & Schneider, M. L. _The age of intelligent_


_machines_ . vol. 580 (MIT press Cambridge, 1990).


17. Goodfellow, I. J. _et al._ Generative Adversarial Networks. Preprint at


[http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.2661 (2014).](http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.2661)


18. Epstein, Z., Boulais, O., Gordon, S. & Groh, M. Interpolating GANs to Scaffold Autotelic


[Creativity. Preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/2007.11119](http://arxiv.org/abs/2007.11119) (2020).


19. Ramesh, A. _et al._ Zero-Shot Text-to-Image Generation. Preprint at


20


[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2102.12092 (2021).](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2102.12092)


20. Ramesh, A., Dhariwal, P., Nichol, A., Chu, C. & Chen, M. Hierarchical Text-Conditional


Image Generation with CLIP Latents. Preprint at [http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.06125 (2022).](http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.06125)


21. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P. & Ommer, B. High-Resolution Image


Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models. Preprint at


[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2112.10752 (2022).](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2112.10752)


22. Epstein, Z., Levine, S., Rand, D. G. & Rahwan, I. Who Gets Credit for AI-Generated


Art? _iScience_ **23** [, 101515 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2020.101515.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2020.101515)


23. Thagard, P. & Stewart, T. C. The AHA! Experience: Creativity Through Emergent


Binding in Neural Networks. _Cogn. Sci._ **35**, 1–33 (2011).


[https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1551-6709.2010.01142.x.](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1551-6709.2010.01142.x)


24. Mikolov, T., Yih, W. & Zweig, G. Linguistic Regularities in Continuous Space Word


Representations. in _Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North American_


_Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language_


_Technologies_ 746–751 (Association for Computational Linguistics, 2013).


25. Colas, C., Karch, T., Moulin-Frier, C. & Oudeyer, P.-Y. Language and culture


internalization for human-like autotelic AI. _Nat. Mach. Intell._ **4**, 1068–1076 (2022).


[https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-022-00591-4.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-022-00591-4)


26. Elgammal, A., Liu, B., Elhoseiny, M. & Mazzone, M. CAN: Creative Adversarial


Networks, Generating ‘Art’ by Learning About Styles and Deviating from Style Norms.


[Preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.07068 (2017).](http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.07068)


27. Wang, Y., Shimada, K. & Barati Farimani, A. Airfoil GAN: encoding and synthesizing


airfoils for aerodynamic shape optimization. _J. Comput. Des. Eng._ **10**, 1350–1362


[(2023). https://doi.org/10.1093/jcde/qwad046.](https://doi.org/10.1093/jcde/qwad046)


28. Metz, C. In Two Moves, AlphaGo and Lee Sedol Redefined the Future. _Wired_ (2016).


29. Silver, D. _et al._ Mastering the game of Go without human knowledge. _Nature_ **550**,


[354–359 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/nature24270.](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature24270)


21


30. Shin, M., Kim, J., van Opheusden, B. & Griffiths, T. L. Superhuman artificial intelligence


can improve human decision-making by increasing novelty. _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci._ **120**,


e2214840120 (2023). [https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2214840120.](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2214840120)


31. Choi, S., Kim, N., Kim, J. & Kang, H. How Does AI Improve Human Decision-Making?


Evidence from the AI-Powered Go Program. SSRN Scholarly Paper at


[https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3893835](https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3893835) (2022).


32. Shin, M., Kim, J. & Kim, M. Human Learning from Artificial Intelligence: Evidence from


Human Go Players’ Decisions after AlphaGo. _Proc. Annu. Meet. Cogn. Sci. Soc._ **43**,


[(2021). https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5095146.](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5095146)


33. Schrittwieser, J. _et al._ Mastering Atari, Go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned


model. _Nature_ **588**, 604–609 (2020). [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-03051-4.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-03051-4)


34. Discovering faster matrix multiplication algorithms with reinforcement learning | Nature.


[https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-022-05172-4.](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-022-05172-4)


35. Kasneci, E. _et al._ ChatGPT for good? On opportunities and challenges of large


language models for education. _Learn. Individ. Differ._ **103**, 102274 (2023).


[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2023.102274.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2023.102274)


36. Wagner, G., Lukyanenko, R. & Paré, G. Artificial intelligence and the conduct of


literature reviews. _J. Inf. Technol._ **37**, 209–226 (2022).


[https://doi.org/10.1177/02683962211048201.](https://doi.org/10.1177/02683962211048201)


37. Chen, M. _et al._ Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code. Preprint at


[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2107.03374 (2021).](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2107.03374)


38. Eloundou, T., Manning, S., Mishkin, P. & Rock, D. GPTs are GPTs: An Early Look at the


Labor Market Impact Potential of Large Language Models. Preprint at


[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.10130 (2023).](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.10130)


39. Stevenson, C., Smal, I., Baas, M., Grasman, R. & van der Maas, H. Putting GPT-3’s


Creativity to the (Alternative Uses) Test. Preprint at


[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.08932 (2022).](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.08932)


22


40. Popli, N. How to Get a Six-Figure Job as an AI Prompt Engineer.


[https://time.com/6272103/ai-prompt-engineer-job/ (2023).](https://time.com/6272103/ai-prompt-engineer-job/)


41. Epstein, Z., Hertzmann, A., & THE INVESTIGATORS OF HUMAN CREATIVITY. Art


and the science of generative AI. _Science_ **380**, 1110–1111 (2023).


[https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adh4451.](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adh4451)


42. Oppenlaender, J. The Creativity of Text-to-Image Generation. in _Proceedings of the_


_25th International Academic Mindtrek Conference_ 192–202 (2022).


[https://doi.org/10.1145/3569219.3569352.](https://doi.org/10.1145/3569219.3569352)


43. Li, Z. (Lionel), Fang, X. & Sheng, O. R. L. A Survey of Link Recommendation for Social


Networks: Methods, Theoretical Foundations, and Future Research Directions. _ACM_


_Trans. Manag. Inf. Syst._ **9** [, 1–26 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1145/3131782.](https://doi.org/10.1145/3131782)


44. Lops, P., de Gemmis, M. & Semeraro, G. Content-based Recommender Systems:


State of the Art and Trends. in _Recommender Systems Handbook_ (eds. Ricci, F.,


Rokach, L., Shapira, B. & Kantor, P. B.) 73–105 (Springer US, 2011).


[https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-85820-3_3.](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-85820-3_3)


45. Su, X. & Khoshgoftaar, T. M. A Survey of Collaborative Filtering Techniques. _Adv. Artif._


_Intell._ **2009**, 1–19 (2009). [https://doi.org/10.1155/2009/421425.](https://doi.org/10.1155/2009/421425)


46. Anderson, A., Maystre, L., Anderson, I., Mehrotra, R. & Lalmas, M. Algorithmic Effects


on the Diversity of Consumption on Spotify. in _Proceedings of The Web Conference_


_2020_ 2155–2165 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2020).


[https://doi.org/10.1145/3366423.3380281.](https://doi.org/10.1145/3366423.3380281)


47. Krumme, C., Cebrian, M., Pickard, G. & Pentland, S. Quantifying Social Influence in an


Online Cultural Market. _PLOS ONE_ **7**, e33785 (2012).


[https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0033785.](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0033785)


48. Salganik, M. J., Dodds, P. S. & Watts, D. J. Experimental Study of Inequality and


Unpredictability in an Artificial Cultural Market. _Science_ **311**, 854–856 (2006).


[https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1121066.](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1121066)


23


49. Richerson, P. J. & Boyd, R. _Not by genes alone: how culture transformed human_


_evolution_ . (University of Chicago Press, 2005).


[https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226712130.001.0001.](https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226712130.001.0001)


50. Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. & Feldman, M. W. _Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A_


_Quantitative Approach_ . (Princeton University Press, 1981).


51. Mesoudi, A. Pursuing Darwin’s curious parallel: Prospects for a science of cultural


evolution. _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci._ **114**, 7853–7860 (2017).


[https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1620741114.](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1620741114)


52. Enquist, M. & Ghirlanda, S. Evolution of social learning does not explain the origin of


human cumulative culture. _J. Theor. Biol._ **246**, 129–135 (2007).


[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2006.12.022.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2006.12.022)


53. Acerbi, A. & Mesoudi, A. If we are all cultural Darwinians what’s the fuss about?


Clarifying recent disagreements in the field of cultural evolution. _Biol. Philos._ **30**,


[481–503 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-015-9490-2.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-015-9490-2)


54. Morin, O. Reasons to be fussy about cultural evolution. _Biol. Philos._ **31**, 447–458


[(2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-016-9516-4.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-016-9516-4)


55. Weitzman, M. L. Recombinant Growth*. _Q. J. Econ._ **113**, 331–360 (1998).


[https://doi.org/10.1162/003355398555595.](https://doi.org/10.1162/003355398555595)


56. Griffiths, T. L. Understanding Human Intelligence through Human Limitations. _Trends_


_Cogn. Sci._ **24**, 873–883 (2020). [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2020.09.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2020.09.001) .


57. Boyd, R. & Richerson, P. J. _Culture and the evolutionary process_ . (University of


Chicago Press, 1985).


58. Mesoudi, A. _Cultural Evolution: How Darwinian Theory Can Explain Human Culture and_


_Synthesize the Social Sciences_ . (University of Chicago Press, 2011).


[https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226520452.001.0001.](https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226520452.001.0001)


59. Leibo, J. Z., Hughes, E., Lanctot, M. & Graepel, T. Autocurricula and the Emergence of


Innovation from Social Interaction: A Manifesto for Multi-Agent Intelligence Research.


24


[Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1903.00742 (2019).](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1903.00742)


60. Aveni, A. F. _Skywatchers: A Revised and Updated Version of Skywatchers of Ancient_


_Mexico_ . (University of Texas Press, 2001). [https://doi.org/10.2307/972243.](https://doi.org/10.2307/972243)


61. Hornik, K. Approximation capabilities of multilayer feedforward networks. _Neural Netw._


**4** [, 251–257 (1991). https://doi.org/10.1016/0893-6080(91)90009-T.](https://doi.org/10.1016/0893-6080(91)90009-T)


62. LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. Deep learning. _Nature_ **521**, 436–444 (2015).


[https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14539.](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14539)


63. Zenil, H. _et al._ The Future of Fundamental Science Led by Generative Closed-Loop


Artificial Intelligence. Preprint at [http://arxiv.org/abs/2307.07522 (2023).](http://arxiv.org/abs/2307.07522)


64. Senior, A. W. _et al._ Improved protein structure prediction using potentials from deep


learning. _Nature_ **577**, 706–710 (2020). [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1923-7.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1923-7)


65. Cooper, S. _et al._ Predicting protein structures with a multiplayer online game. _Nature_


**466**, 756–760 (2010). [https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09304.](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09304)


66. Bommasani, R. _et al._ On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models. Preprint at


[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2108.07258 (2022).](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2108.07258)


67. Hoffmann, J. _et al._ Training Compute-Optimal Large Language Models. Preprint at


[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.15556 (2022).](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.15556)


68. Bender, E. M., Gebru, T., McMillan-Major, A. & Shmitchell, S. On the Dangers of


Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Models Be Too Big? 🦜. in _Proceedings of the 2021_


_ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency_ 610–623 (Association


for Computing Machinery, 2021). [https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445922.](https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445922)


69. Brown, T. _et al._ Language models are few-shot learners. _Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst._


**33**, 1877–1901 (2020).


70. Mitchell, M. & Krakauer, D. C. The debate over understanding in AI’s large language


models. _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci._ **120**, e2215907120 (2023).


[https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2215907120.](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2215907120)


71. Charbonneau, M. Modularity and Recombination in Technological Evolution. _Philos._


25


_Technol._ **29**, 373–392 (2016). [https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-016-0228-0.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-016-0228-0)


72. Henrich, J. Demography and Cultural Evolution: How Adaptive Cultural Processes Can


Produce Maladaptive Losses—The Tasmanian Case. _Am. Antiq._ **69**, 197–214 (2004).


[https://doi.org/10.2307/4128416.](https://doi.org/10.2307/4128416)


73. Henrich, J. & Muthukrishna, M. What Makes Us Smart? _Top. Cogn. Sci._ (2023)


[https://doi.org/10.1111/tops.12656.](https://doi.org/10.1111/tops.12656)


74. Youn, H., Strumsky, D., Bettencourt, L. M. A. & Lobo, J. Invention as a combinatorial


process: evidence from US patents. _J. R. Soc. Interface_ **12**, 20150272 (2015).


[https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2015.0272.](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2015.0272)


75. Sourati, J. & Evans, J. A. Accelerating science with human-aware artificial intelligence.


_Nat. Hum. Behav._ 1–15 (2023) [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-023-01648-z.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-023-01648-z)


76. Tinits, P. & Sobchuk, O. Open-ended cumulative cultural evolution of Hollywood film


crews. _Evol. Hum. Sci._ **2**, e26 (2020). [https://doi.org/10.1017/ehs.2020.21.](https://doi.org/10.1017/ehs.2020.21)


77. Grizou, J., Points, L. J., Sharma, A. & Cronin, L. A curious formulation robot enables


the discovery of a novel protocell behavior. _Sci. Adv._ **6**, eaay4237 (2020).


[https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aay4237.](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aay4237)


78. Kramer, S., Cerrato, M., Džeroski, S. & King, R. Automated Scientific Discovery: From


Equation Discovery to Autonomous Discovery Systems. Preprint at


[http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.02251 (2023).](http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.02251)


79. Lucas, A. J. _et al._ The value of teaching increases with tool complexity in cumulative


cultural evolution. _Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci._ **287**, 20201885 (2020).


[https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2020.1885.](https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2020.1885)


80. Borsa, D., Piot, B., Munos, R. & Pietquin, O. Observational Learning by Reinforcement


[Learning. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1706.06617 (2017).](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1706.06617)


81. Kohnke, L., Moorhouse, B. L. & Zou, D. ChatGPT for Language Teaching and


Learning. _RELC J._ 00336882231162868 (2023).


[https://doi.org/10.1177/00336882231162868.](https://doi.org/10.1177/00336882231162868)


26


82. Haller, E. & Rebedea, T. Designing a Chat-bot that Simulates an Historical Figure. in


_2013 19th International Conference on Control Systems and Computer Science_


[582–589 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/CSCS.2013.85.](https://doi.org/10.1109/CSCS.2013.85)


83. Zhang, S., Frey, B. & Bansal, M. How can NLP Help Revitalize Endangered


Languages? A Case Study and Roadmap for the Cherokee Language. Preprint at


[http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.11909 (2022).](http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.11909)


84. Ijaz, K., Bogdanovych, A. & Trescak, T. Virtual worlds vs books and videos in history


education. _Interact. Learn. Environ._ **25**, 904–929 (2017).


[https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2016.1225099.](https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2016.1225099)


85. Buolamwini, J. & Gebru, T. Gender Shades: Intersectional Accuracy Disparities in


Commercial Gender Classification. in _Proceedings of the 1st Conference on Fairness,_


_Accountability and Transparency_ 77–91 (PMLR, 2018).


86. Caliskan, A., Bryson, J. J. & Narayanan, A. Semantics derived automatically from


language corpora contain human-like biases. _Science_ **356**, 183–186 (2017).


[https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aal4230.](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aal4230)


87. O’Neil, C. _Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and_


_Threatens Democracy_ [. (Crown, 2016). https://doi.org/10.5860/crl.78.3.403.](https://doi.org/10.5860/crl.78.3.403)


88. Prates, M. O. R., Avelar, P. H. C. & Lamb, L. Assessing Gender Bias in Machine


Translation -- A Case Study with Google Translate. Preprint at


[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1809.02208 (2019).](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1809.02208)


89. Acerbi, A. & Stubbersfield, J. Large language models show human-like content biases


in transmission chain experiments. Preprint at [https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/8zg4d](https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/8zg4d)


(2023).


90. Vig, J. _et al._ Investigating Gender Bias in Language Models Using Causal Mediation


Analysis. in _Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems_ vol. 33 12388–12401


(Curran Associates, Inc., 2020).


91. Pessach, D. & Shmueli, E. A Review on Fairness in Machine Learning. _ACM Comput._


27


_Surv._ **55** [, 51:1-51:44 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3494672.](https://doi.org/10.1145/3494672)


92. Argyle, L. P. _et al._ Out of One, Many: Using Language Models to Simulate Human


Samples. in _Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for_


_Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)_ 819–862 (2022).


[https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.60.](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.60)


93. Hendy, A. _et al._ How Good Are GPT Models at Machine Translation? A Comprehensive


Evaluation. Preprint at [http://arxiv.org/abs/2302.09210 (2023).](http://arxiv.org/abs/2302.09210)


94. Bartlett, F. C. _Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology_ . xix, 317


(Cambridge University Press, 1932).


95. Kashima, Y. Maintaining Cultural Stereotypes in the Serial Reproduction of Narratives.


_Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull._ **26**, 594–604 (2000).


[https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167200267007.](https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167200267007)


96. Griffiths, T. L., Christian, B. R. & Kalish, M. L. Using Category Structures to Test


Iterated Learning as a Method for Identifying Inductive Biases. _Cogn. Sci._ **32**, 68–107


[(2008). https://doi.org/10.1080/03640210701801974.](https://doi.org/10.1080/03640210701801974)


97. Lieder, F. & Griffiths, T. L. Resource-rational analysis: Understanding human cognition


as the optimal use of limited computational resources. _Behav. Brain Sci._ **43**, e1 (2020).


98. Simon, H. A. Bounded Rationality. in _Utility and Probability_ (eds. Eatwell, J., Milgate, M.


& Newman, P.) 15–18 (Palgrave Macmillan UK, 1990).


[https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-349-20568-4_5.](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-349-20568-4_5)


99. Todd, P. M. & Gigerenzer, G. Environments That Make Us Smart: Ecological


Rationality. _Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci._ **16**, 167–171 (2007).


[https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8721.2007.00497.x.](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8721.2007.00497.x)


100. Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases.


_Science_ **185** [, 1124–1131 (1974). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.185.4157.1124.](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.185.4157.1124)


101. Gershman, S. J., Horvitz, E. J. & Tenenbaum, J. B. Computational rationality: A


converging paradigm for intelligence in brains, minds, and machines. _Science_ **349**,


28


[273–278 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aac6076.](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aac6076)


102. Malle, B. F., Scheutz, M., Arnold, T., Voiklis, J. & Cusimano, C. Sacrifice One For the


Good of Many? People Apply Different Moral Norms to Human and Robot Agents. in


_Proceedings of the Tenth Annual ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot_


_Interaction_ 117–124 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2015).


[https://doi.org/10.1145/2696454.2696458.](https://doi.org/10.1145/2696454.2696458)


103. Griffiths, T. L., Kalish, M. L. & Lewandowsky, S. Theoretical and empirical evidence for


the impact of inductive biases on cultural evolution. _Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci._


**363**, 3503–3514 (2008). [https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2008.0146.](https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2008.0146)


104. Kirby, S., Dowman, M. & Griffiths, T. L. Innateness and culture in the evolution of


language. _PNAS Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. Am._ **104**, 5241–5245 (2007).


[https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0608222104.](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0608222104)


105. Thompson, B. & Griffiths, T. L. Human biases limit cumulative innovation. _Proc. R. Soc._


_B Biol. Sci._ **288**, 20202752 (2021). [https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2020.2752.](https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2020.2752)


106. Brinkmann, L. _et al._ Hybrid social learning in human-algorithm cultural transmission.


_Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Math. Phys. Eng. Sci._ **380**, 20200426 (2022).


[https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2020.0426.](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2020.0426)


107. Tamariz, M. & Kirby, S. Culture: copying, compression, and conventionality. _Cogn. Sci._


**39** [, 171–183 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12144.](https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12144)


108. Chater, N. & Vitányi, P. Simplicity: a unifying principle in cognitive science? _Trends_


_Cogn. Sci._ **7**, 19–22 (2003). [https://doi.org/10.1016/s1364-6613(02)00005-0.](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1364-6613(02)00005-0)


109. Kirby, S., Tamariz, M., Cornish, H. & Smith, K. Compression and communication in the


cultural evolution of linguistic structure. _Cognition_ **141**, 87–102 (2015).


[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2015.03.016.](https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1016/j.cognition.2015.03.016)


110. Anderson, C. The End of Theory: The Data Deluge Makes the Scientific Method


Obsolete. _Wired_ (2018).


111. Spinney, L. Are we witnessing the dawn of post-theory science? _The Guardian_ (2022).


29


112. Liu, Z., Madhavan, V. & Tegmark, M. AI Poincaré 2.0: Machine Learning Conservation


Laws from Differential Equations. _Phys. Rev. E_ **106**, 045307 (2022).


[https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.106.045307.](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.106.045307)


113. Kendal, R. L. _et al._ Social Learning Strategies: Bridge-Building between Fields. _Trends_


_Cogn. Sci._ **22** [, 651–665 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.04.003.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.04.003)


114. Henrich, J. & McElreath, R. The evolution of cultural evolution. _Evol. Anthropol. Issues_


_News Rev. Issues News Rev._ **12** [, 123–135 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1002/evan.10110.](https://doi.org/10.1002/evan.10110)


115. Mesoudi, A., Whiten, A. & Dunbar, R. A bias for social information in human cultural


transmission. _Br. J. Psychol._ **97**, 405–423 (2006).


[https://doi.org/10.1348/000712605X85871.](https://doi.org/10.1348/000712605X85871)


116. Sharma, D. K. & Sharma, A. A comparative analysis of web page ranking algorithms.


_Int. J. Comput. Sci. Eng._ **2**, 2670–2676 (2010).


117. Duhan, N., Sharma, A. K. & Bhatia, K. K. Page Ranking Algorithms: A Survey. in _2009_


_IEEE International Advance Computing Conference_ 1530–1537 (2009).


[https://doi.org/10.1109/IADCC.2009.4809246.](https://doi.org/10.1109/IADCC.2009.4809246)


118. Koren, Y., Rendle, S. & Bell, R. Advances in collaborative filtering. _Recomm. Syst._


_Handb._ 91–142 (2022). [https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-2197-4_3.](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-2197-4_3)


119. Banihashemi, S. & Abhari, A. Effects of Different Recommendation Algorithms on


Structure of Social Networks. in _2021 International Conference on Computational_


_Science and Computational Intelligence (CSCI)_ 1395–1400 (2021).


[https://doi.org/10.1109/CSCI54926.2021.00279.](https://doi.org/10.1109/CSCI54926.2021.00279)


120. Ferrara, A., Espín-Noboa, L., Karimi, F. & Wagner, C. Link recommendations: Their


impact on network structure and minorities. in _14th ACM Web Science Conference_


_2022_ 228–238 (2022). [https://doi.org/10.1145/3501247.3531583.](https://doi.org/10.1145/3501247.3531583)


121. Su, J., Sharma, A. & Goel, S. The Effect of Recommendations on Network Structure. in


_Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on World Wide Web_ 1157–1167


(International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, 2016).


30


[https://doi.org/10.1145/2872427.2883040.](https://doi.org/10.1145/2872427.2883040)


122. Lazer, D. & Friedman, A. The Network Structure of Exploration and Exploitation. _Adm._


_Sci. Q._ **52**, 667–694 (2007). [https://doi.org/10.2189/asqu.52.4.667.](https://doi.org/10.2189/asqu.52.4.667)


123. Mason, W. & Watts, D. J. Collaborative learning in networks. _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci._ **109**,


[764–769 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1110069108.](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1110069108)


124. Woolley, A. W., Aggarwal, I. & Malone, T. W. Collective Intelligence and Group


Performance. _Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci._ **24**, 420–424 (2015).


[https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721415599543.](https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721415599543)


125. Derex, M. & Boyd, R. Partial connectivity increases cultural accumulation within groups.


_Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci._ **113**, 2982–2987 (2016).


[https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1518798113.](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1518798113)


126. Kant, V., Jhalani, T. & Dwivedi, P. Enhanced multi-criteria recommender system based


on fuzzy Bayesian approach. _Multimed. Tools Appl._ **77**, 12935–12953 (2018).


[https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-017-4924-2.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-017-4924-2)


127. Bollen, D., Knijnenburg, B. P., Willemsen, M. C. & Graus, M. Understanding choice


overload in recommender systems. in _Proceedings of the fourth ACM conference on_


_Recommender systems_ 63–70 (2010). [https://doi.org/10.1145/1864708.1864724.](https://doi.org/10.1145/1864708.1864724)


128. Tkalcic, M., Kosir, A. & Tasic, J. Affective recommender systems: the role of emotions


in recommender systems. in _The RecSys 2011 Workshops-Decisions@ RecSys 2011_


_and UCERSTI-2: Human Decision Making in Recommender Systems; User-Centric_


_Evaluation of Recommender Systems and Their Interfaces-2_ vol. 811 9–13 (CEUR-WS.


org, 2011).


129. Gonzalez, G., de la Rosa, J. L., Montaner, M. & Delfin, S. Embedding Emotional


Context in Recommender Systems. in _2007 IEEE 23rd International Conference on_


_Data Engineering Workshop_ 845–852 (2007).


[https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDEW.2007.4401075.](https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDEW.2007.4401075)


130. Osman, N. A., Mohd Noah, S. A., Darwich, M. & Mohd, M. Integrating contextual


31


sentiment analysis in collaborative recommender systems. _PLoS ONE_ **16**, e0248695


[(2021). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0248695.](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0248695)


131. Zheng, Y., Mobasher, B. & Burke, R. D. The Role of Emotions in Context-aware


Recommendation. _Decis. RecSys_ **2013**, 21–28 (2013).


[https://doi.org/10.13140/2.1.2660.1769.](https://doi.org/10.13140/2.1.2660.1769)


132. Zhang, X., Ferreira, P., Godinho De Matos, M. & Belo, R. Welfare Properties of Profit


Maximizing Recommender Systems: Theory and Results from a Randomized


Experiment. _MIS Q._ **45** [, 1–43 (2021). https://doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/2021/14971.](https://doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/2021/14971)


133. Levy, R. Social Media, News Consumption, and Polarization: Evidence from a Field


Experiment. _Am. Econ. Rev._ **111**, 831–870 (2021).


[https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20191777.](https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20191777)


134. Brady, W. J., Gantman, A. P. & Van Bavel, J. J. Attentional capture helps explain why


moral and emotional content go viral. _J. Exp. Psychol. Gen._ **149**, 746–756 (2020).


[https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000673.](https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000673)


135. Brady, W. J., Jackson, J. C., Lindström, B. & Crockett, M. J. Algorithm-mediated social


learning in online social networks. _Trends Cogn. Sci._ **27**, 947-960 (2023).


[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2023.06.008.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2023.06.008)


136. Acerbi, A. Cognitive attraction and online misinformation. _Palgrave Commun._ **5**, 1–7


[(2019). https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0224-y.](https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0224-y)


137. Brady, W. J. _et al._ Overperception of moral outrage in online social networks inflates


beliefs about intergroup hostility. _Nat. Hum. Behav._ 1–11 (2023)


[https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-023-01582-0.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-023-01582-0)


138. Brady, W. J. & Crockett, M. J. Norm Psychology in the Digital Age: How Social Media


Shapes the Cultural Evolution of Normativity. _Perspect. Psychol. Sci._


[17456916231187395 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1177/17456916231187395.](https://doi.org/10.1177/17456916231187395)


139. Milli, S., Carroll, M., Pandey, S., Wang, Y. & Dragan, A. D. Twitter’s Algorithm:


Amplifying Anger, Animosity, and Affective Polarization. Preprint at


32


[http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16941 (2023).](http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16941)


140. Cinelli, M., De Francisci Morales, G., Galeazzi, A., Quattrociocchi, W. & Starnini, M.


The echo chamber effect on social media. _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci._ **118**, e2023301118


[(2021). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2023301118.](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2023301118)


141. Pariser, E. _The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding from You_ . (The Penguin Press


HC, 2011).


142. Sunstein, C. R. _Republic.com 2.0_ . (Princeton University Press, 2007).


143. Jiang, R., Chiappa, S., Lattimore, T., György, A. & Kohli, P. Degenerate Feedback


Loops in Recommender Systems. in _Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference_


_on AI, Ethics, and Society_ 383–390 (ACM, 2019).


[https://doi.org/10.1145/3306618.3314288.](https://doi.org/10.1145/3306618.3314288)


144. Pagan, N. _et al._ A Classification of Feedback Loops and Their Relation to Biases in


[Automated Decision-Making Systems. Preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.06055](http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.06055)


(2023).


145. Stray, J. _et al._ Building Human Values into Recommender Systems: An Interdisciplinary


[Synthesis. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2207.10192](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2207.10192) (2022).


146. Kleinberg, J., Mullainathan, S. & Raghavan, M. The Challenge of Understanding What


Users Want: Inconsistent Preferences and Engagement Optimization. Preprint at


[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2202.11776](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2202.11776) (2022).


147. Ovadya, A. & Thorburn, L. Bridging Systems: Open Problems for Countering


Destructive Divisiveness across Ranking, Recommenders, and Governance. Preprint


at [http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.09976 (2023).](http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.09976)


148. Yao, B., Jiang, M., Yang, D. & Hu, J. Empowering LLM-based Machine Translation with


[Cultural Awareness. Preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14328 (2023).](http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14328)


149. Garimella, K., De Francisci Morales, G., Gionis, A. & Mathioudakis, M. Reducing


Controversy by Connecting Opposing Views. in _Proceedings of the Tenth ACM_


_International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining_ 81–90 (Association for


33


Computing Machinery, 2017). [https://doi.org/10.1145/3018661.3018703.](https://doi.org/10.1145/3018661.3018703)


150. Santos, F. P., Lelkes, Y. & Levin, S. A. Link recommendation algorithms and dynamics


of polarization in online social networks. _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci._ **118**, e2102141118


[(2021). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2102141118.](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2102141118)


151. Möller, J., Trilling, D., Helberger, N. & Van Es, B. Do not blame it on the algorithm: an


empirical assessment of multiple recommender systems and their impact on content


diversity. _Inf. Commun. Soc._ **21**, 959–977 (2018).


[https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2018.1444076.](https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2018.1444076)


152. Bakker, M. A. _et al._ Fine-tuning language models to find agreement among humans


with diverse preferences. Preprint at [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2211.15006](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2211.15006) (2022).


153. Christiano, P. _et al._ Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. Preprint at


[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1706.03741 (2023).](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1706.03741)


154. Ouyang, L. _et al._ Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.


[Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.02155 (2022).](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.02155)


155. Perez, E. _et al._ Discovering Language Model Behaviors with Model-Written


[Evaluations. Preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.09251](http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.09251) (2022).


156. Claidière, N., Scott-Phillips, T. C. & Sperber, D. How Darwinian is cultural evolution?


_Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci._ **369**, 20130368 (2014).


[https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0368.](https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0368)


157. Blancke, S., Van Breusegem, F., De Jaeger, G., Braeckman, J. & Van Montagu, M.


Fatal attraction: the intuitive appeal of GMO opposition. _Trends Plant Sci._ **20**, 414–418


[(2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2015.03.011.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2015.03.011)


158. Miton, H. & Mercier, H. Cognitive Obstacles to Pro-Vaccination Beliefs. _Trends Cogn._


_Sci._ **19**, 633–636 (2015). [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2015.08.007.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2015.08.007)


159. Poulsen, V. & DeDeo, S. Cognitive Attractors and the Cultural Evolution of Religion.


[Preprint at https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/daxyu (2023).](https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/daxyu)


160. Kirchenbauer, J. _et al._ A Watermark for Large Language Models. Preprint at


34


[http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.10226 (2023).](http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.10226)


161. Shumailov, I. _et al._ The Curse of Recursion: Training on Generated Data Makes Models


[Forget. Preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.17493](http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.17493) (2023).


162. Veselovsky, V., Ribeiro, M. H. & West, R. Artificial Artificial Artificial Intelligence: Crowd


Workers Widely Use Large Language Models for Text Production Tasks. Preprint at


[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.07899 (2023).](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.07899)


163. Japkowicz, N. & Stephen, S. The class imbalance problem: A systematic study. _Intell._


_Data Anal._ **6**, 429–449 (2002). [https://doi.org/10.3233/IDA-2002-6504.](https://doi.org/10.3233/IDA-2002-6504)


164. Kalish, M. L., Griffiths, T. L. & Lewandowsky, S. Iterated learning: Intergenerational


knowledge transmission reveals inductive biases. _Psychon. Bull. Rev._ **14**, 288–294


[(2007). https://doi.org/10.3758/bf03194066.](https://doi.org/10.3758/bf03194066)


165. Axelrod, R. The Dissemination of Culture: A Model with Local Convergence and Global


Polarization. _J. Confl. Resolut._ **41**, 203–226 (1997).


[https://doi.org/10.1177/0022002797041002001.](https://doi.org/10.1177/0022002797041002001)


166. Touvron, H. _et al._ LLaMA: Open and Efficient Foundation Language Models. Preprint at


[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.13971 (2023).](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.13971)


167. West, S. M., Whittaker, M. & Crawford, K. Discriminating systems: gender, race and


power in AI. _AI Inst._


168. Autor, D. H. Why Are There Still So Many Jobs? The History and Future of Workplace


Automation. _J. Econ. Perspect._ **29** [, 3–30 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.29.3.3.](https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.29.3.3)


169. Ayers, J. W. _et al._ Comparing physician and artificial intelligence chatbot responses to


patient questions posted to a public social media forum. _JAMA Intern. Med._ **183**,


589-596 (2023). [https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2023.1838](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2023.1838) .


170. Sharma, A., Lin, I. W., Miner, A. S., Atkins, D. C. & Althoff, T. Human–AI collaboration


enables more empathic conversations in text-based peer-to-peer mental health


support. _Nat. Mach. Intell._ **5**, 46–57 (2023).


[https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-022-00593-2.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-022-00593-2)


35


171. Perry, A. AI will never convey the essence of human empathy. _Nat. Hum. Behav._ 1–2


[(2023) https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-023-01675-w.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-023-01675-w)


172. Weisz, E. & Zaki, J. Motivated empathy: a social neuroscience perspective. _Curr. Opin._


_Psychol._ **24**, 67–71 (2018). [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2018.05.005.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2018.05.005)


173. Carroll, M., Hadfield-Menell, D., Russell, S. & Dragan, A. Estimating and Penalizing


Preference Shift in Recommender Systems. in _Proceedings of the 15th ACM_


_Conference on Recommender Systems_ 661–667 (Association for Computing


Machinery, 2021). [https://doi.org/10.1145/3460231.3478849.](https://doi.org/10.1145/3460231.3478849)


174. Bakshy, E., Messing, S. & Adamic, L. A. Exposure to ideologically diverse news and


opinion on Facebook. _Science_ **348**, 1130–1132 (2015).


[https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa1160.](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa1160)


175. Robertson, R. E. _et al._ Users choose to engage with more partisan news than they are


exposed to on Google Search. _Nature_ **618**, 342–348 (2023).


[https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06078-5.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06078-5)


176. Art made by artificial intelligence is developing a style of its own. _The Economist_ .


177. Obradovich, N. _et al._ Expanding the measurement of culture with a sample of two


billion humans. _J. R. Soc. Interface_ **19**, 20220085 (2022).


[https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2022.0085.](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2022.0085)


178. Garg, N., Schiebinger, L., Jurafsky, D. & Zou, J. Word embeddings quantify 100 years


of gender and ethnic stereotypes. _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci._ **115**, E3635–E3644 (2018).


[https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1720347115.](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1720347115)


179. Karjus, A., Solà, M. C., Ohm, T., Ahnert, S. E. & Schich, M. Compression ensembles


quantify aesthetic complexity and the evolution of visual art. _EPJ Data Sci._ **12**, 21


[(2023). https://doi.org/10.1140/epjds/s13688-023-00397-3.](https://doi.org/10.1140/epjds/s13688-023-00397-3)


180. Santy, S., Liang, J. T., Bras, R. L., Reinecke, K. & Sap, M. NLPositionality:


Characterizing Design Biases of Datasets and Models. Preprint at


[http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01943 (2023).](http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01943)


36


181. Awad, E. _et al._ The Moral Machine experiment. _Nature_ **563**, 59–64 (2018).


[https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0637-6.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0637-6)


182. Brandt, F., Conitzer, V. & Endriss, U. Computational Social Choice. in _Multiagent_


_Systems_ (The MIT Press, 2013).


183. Koster, R. _et al._ Human-centred mechanism design with Democratic AI. _Nat. Hum._


_Behav._ **6** [, 1398–1407 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01383-x.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01383-x)


184. Small, C. T. _et al._ Opportunities and Risks of LLMs for Scalable Deliberation with Polis.


[Preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.11932 (2023).](http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.11932)


185. Rahwan, I. Society-in-the-loop: programming the algorithmic social contract. _Ethics Inf._


_Technol._ **20** [, 5–14 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-017-9430-8.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-017-9430-8)


186. Jernite, Y. _et al._ Data Governance in the Age of Large-Scale Data-Driven Language


Technology. in _2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency_


[2206–2222 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3531146.3534637.](https://doi.org/10.1145/3531146.3534637)


187. Laurençon, H. _et al._ The BigScience ROOTS Corpus: A 1.6TB Composite Multilingual


[Dataset. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.03915 (2023).](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.03915)


188. Ziegler, D. M. _et al._ Fine-Tuning Language Models from Human Preferences. Preprint


at [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1909.08593](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1909.08593) (2020).


189. Bai, Y. _et al._ Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI Feedback. Preprint at


[http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08073 (2022).](http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08073)


190. Bergstrom, C. T. & Lachmann, M. The Red King effect: When the slowest runner wins


the coevolutionary race. _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci._ **100**, 593–598 (2003).


[https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0134966100.](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0134966100)


191. Bostrom, N. _Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies_ . (Oxford University Press,


2014).


192. Wilson, D. S. _et al._ Multilevel cultural evolution: From new theory to practical


applications. _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A._ **120**, e2218222120 (2023).


[https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2218222120.](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2218222120)


37


193. DALL·E: Creating Images from Text, https://openai.com/research/dall-e (OpenAI, 2021).


194. Lisi, E., Malekzadeh, M., Haddadi H., Lau, F.D.-H. & Flaxman, S. Modelling and


forecasting art movements with CGANs R. Soc. Open Science 7, 191569 (2020).


[https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.191569.](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.191569)


38


