## The cultural niche: Why social learning is essential for human adaptation

Robert Boyd [a,1], Peter J. Richerson [b,1], and Joseph Henrich [c,1]


a Department of Anthropology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095; b Department of Environmental Science and Policy, University of California,
Davis, CA 95616; and [c] Departments of Psychology and Economics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z4


Edited by John C. Avise, University of California, Irvine, CA, and approved March 29, 2011 (received for review February 11, 2011)



In the last 60,000 y humans have expanded across the globe and
now occupy a wider range than any other terrestrial species. Our
ability to successfully adapt to such a diverse range of habitats is
often explained in terms of our cognitive ability. Humans have
relatively bigger brains and more computing power than other
animals, and this allows us to figure out how to live in a wide range
of environments. Here we argue that humans may be smarter than
other creatures, but none of us is nearly smart enough to acquire
all of the information necessary to survive in any single habitat. In
even the simplest foraging societies, people depend on a vast array
of tools, detailed bodies of local knowledge, and complex social
arrangements and often do not understand why these tools, beliefs,
and behaviors are adaptive. We owe our success to our uniquely
developed ability to learn from others. This capacity enables humans
to gradually accumulate information across generations and develop
well-adapted tools, beliefs, and practices that are too complex for
any single individual to invent during their lifetime.


cognitive niche | cultural evolution | human evolution |
human adaptation | intelligence

# I n its brief evolutionary history,occupy a larger range than any other terrestrial vertebrate Homo sapiens has come to

species. Earlier hominins, such as Homo heidelbergensis and
Neanderthals, were limited to Africa and the temperate regions
of southern Eurasia. Behaviorally modern humans were living in
Africa by 70,000 y ago (1). Between 50,000 and 60,000 y ago,
people left Africa, crossing into southwest Asia (2). From there
they spread rapidly through southern Eurasia, reaching Australia
by 45,000 y ago, a feat that only one other terrestrial mammal (a
murid rodent) was able to accomplish (3). Soon after this, people
penetrated far north, reaching the latitude of Moscow by 40,000 y
ago and the Arctic Ocean by 30,000 y ago. People had spread
almost as far south as the southern tip of South America 13,000 y
ago, and by 5,000 y ago humans occupied virtually every terrestrial habitat except Antarctica and some islands in Oceania (2).
Even the most cosmopolitan bird and mammal species have

–
substantially smaller ranges (4 6).

This global expansion required the rapid development of a vast
range of new knowledge, tools, and social arrangements. The
people who moved out of Africa were tropical foragers. Northern
Eurasia was an immense treeless steppe, relatively poor in plant
resources and teeming with unfamiliar prey species. The people

—
that roamed the steppe confronted a hostile climate temperatures
fell to −20 °C for months at a time, and there were often high
winds. Surviving in such environments requires a whole new suite

—
of adaptations tailored clothing (7), well-engineered shelters,
local knowledge about game, and techniques for creating light
and heat. This is just the northern Eurasian steppe; each of the
other environments occupied by modern human foragers presented a different constellation of adaptive problems. Ethnographic and historical accounts of 19th and 20th century foraging
peoples make it clear that these problems were solved through a
diverse array of habitat-specific adaptations (8). Although these
adaptations were complex and functionally integrated, they were
mainly cultural, not genetic, adaptations. Much evidence indi


cates, in fact, that local genetic changes have played only a relatively small part in our ability to inhabit such a diverse range of
environments (9, 10).

Why are humans so much better at adapting to novel environments than other mammals? There have been many different
answers to this question, but the most influential are rooted in the
idea that people are simply smarter than other creatures. We have
bigger brains and more computing power, and this allows us to
adapt to a wider range of environments than other animals. One of
the clearest statements of this hypothesis comes from a series of

–
papers by Tooby, Cosmides, Pinker, and collaborators (11 14).
Other animals, they argue, are limited to what they call “dedicated
intelligence,” domain-specific learning and decision-making mechanisms that are adapted to particular environments. Humans, by
contrast, have evolved “improvisational intelligence,” a suite of
uniquely flexible cognitive capacities that allow our species to
acquire locally adaptive behavior in a wide range of environments.
In short, we are adapted to the “cognitive niche” (11, 14). These
capacities are augmented by our species’ ability to learn from each
other, especially using grammatical language.

This hypothesis flows from a nativist, modularist view of cognition. Its central premise is that broad general problems are
much more difficult to solve than narrow specialized ones, and
therefore the minds of all animals, including humans, are built of
many special-purpose mechanisms dedicated to solving specific
adaptive problems that face particular species. These mechanisms are modular in that they take inputs and generate outputs
relevant to problems in particular domains such as mate choice,
foraging, and the management of social relationships. These
authors are nativists because they believe that evolved mechanisms depend on a considerable amount of innate information
about the relationships between cues and outcomes in particular
domains for particular species. For example, mechanisms that
regulate decisions about mate choice in human males may be
based on the assumption that long-term mating is likely, and thus
selection favored a psychology that leads men to be attracted to
young women. Analogous mechanisms in chimpanzees, which
do not form long-term bonds, have produced a psychology that
causes males to prefer older females, perhaps because they are
better mothers (15). Mechanisms regulating social exchange are
specialized in other ways. The innate content is built up because
learning and decision mechanisms have been shaped by natural
selection to solve the important recurrent adaptive problems that
confronted the species.


This paper results from the Arthur M. Sackler Colloquium of the National Academy of
Sciences, “In the Light of Evolution V: Cooperation and Conflict,” held January 7–8, 2011,
at the Arnold and Mabel Beckman Center of the National Academies of Sciences and

Engineering in Irvine, CA. The complete program and audio files of most presentations
are available on the NAS Web site at www.nasonline.org/SACKLER_cooperation.


Author contributions: R.B., P.J.R., and J.H. wrote the paper.


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.


1 [To whom correspondence may be addressed. E-mail: rboyd@anthro.ucla.edu, pjricherson@](mailto:rboyd@anthro.ucla.edu)

[ucdavis.edu, or henrich@psych.ubc.ca.](mailto:pjricherson@ucdavis.edu)



10918–10925 | PNAS | June 28, 2011 | vol. 108 | suppl. 2 www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1100290108


This view of cognitive evolution seems to preclude flexible,
widely applicable cognitive abilities; or, as Cosmides and Tooby
put it, “. . .on first inspection, there appear to be only two biologically possible choices for evolved minds: either general ineptitude or narrow competences” (12). However, these authors
believe that humans, and only humans, have undergone an evolutionary breakthrough that gives them “the computational ability
to improvise solutions in developmental time to evolutionarily
novel problems” (13). The key ability is the use of cause-andeffect reasoning to make inferences about local environmental
contingencies. As Pinker puts it,


These inferences are played out internally in mental models of the
world. . ..It allows humans to invent tools, traps, and weapons, to
extract poisons and drugs from other animals and plants. . ..These
cognitive stratagems are devised on the fly in endless combinations
suitable to the local ecology. They arise by mental design and are
deployed, tested, and fine-tuned by feedback in the lifetime of individuals. . . (14, pp 8993−8994)


These inferential capacities are augmented by a second evolutionary innovation, the ability to learn from each other, a capacity that dramatically lowers the cost of acquiring information
necessary for local, contingent adaptations.

It seems likely that the average human is smarter than the
average chimpanzee, at least in domains like planning, causal
reasoning, and theory of mind. However, we do not think this is
sufficient to explain our ecological success. The cognitive niche
hypothesis overestimates the extent to which individual human
cognitive abilities allow people to succeed in diverse environments and misunderstands the role that culture plays in a number of important ways. We suggest, instead, that our uniquely
developed ability to learn from others is absolutely crucial for
human ecological success. This capacity enables humans to
gradually accumulate information across generations and develop well-adapted tools, beliefs, and practices that no individual
could invent on their own. We have entered the “cultural niche,”
and our exploitation of this niche has had a profound impact on
the trajectory of human evolution. In the remainder of this article, we will develop this argument in more detail.


Culture Is Essential for Human Adaptation
It is easy to underestimate the scope, sophistication, and importance of the pool of culturally transmitted information that
supports human subsistence, even in what seem to be the “simplest” foraging societies. The archaeological record makes it
clear that modern humans adapted to life above the Arctic Circle
early in their expansion but tells us little about their way of life.
However, ethnographic studies of the Netsilik and Copper Inuit,
collectively known as the Central Inuit, give us a sense of the
complexity of the adaptations that allow foragers to thrive in the
Arctic. These people occupy a habitat that is harsh and unproductive, even by Arctic standards. Their groups were small,
and their lifeways were simple compared with foragers living on
the coasts of Alaska and Greenland. To focus your mind on the
crucial adaptive challenges, imagine that you are marooned on
a beach on the coast of King William Island (68.935N, 98.89W).
It is November and it is very cold.

Your first problem is to stay warm. Monthly average temperatures in the winter months are between −25 °C and −35 °C.
Even well-acclimatized people rapidly succumb to hypothermia
below −1 °C, so you need warm clothes. If there were no wind
and you could remain motionless, a cloak would do, but this
is a windy place and you need to hunt, so you will need welltailored clothes (7). In the winter, the Central Inuit wore elaborately constructed parkas and pants (16). The best were made
from caribou skins harvested in the fall. Caribou skins insulate



better than seal or polar bear fur because the individual hairs
have an unusual air-filled structure, something like bubble wrap
(17). Caribou skins harvested in autumn have fur that is just the
right thickness. Hides were repeatedly stretched, scraped,
moistened, and then stretched again to yield pliable skins (18).
Parkas were assembled from multiple pieces to create a bell
shape that captures heat, while also allowing moisture to dissipate when the hood is thrown back. Hoods were ruffed with
a strip of fur taken from a wolverine’s shoulders because its
variable length makes it easier to clear the hoarfrost. Winter
footwear was constructed with many layers: first the alirsiik, furlined caribou stockings, then the ilupirquk, short lightweight
stockings with the fur outside, then a pair of pinirait, heavier
stockings with the fur to the outside, then kamiik, boots with the
fur outside, and finally tuqtuqutiq, short heavy double-soled
boots of caribou skin. Clothing was stitched together with fine
thread made from sinew taken from around the vertebrae of
caribou. The sinew had to be cleaned, scraped, shredded, and
twisted to make thread. Several different kinds of stitches were
used for different kinds of seams. A complicated double stitch
was used to make footwear waterproof. To make these stitches,
Central Inuit women used fine bone needles that made holes that
were smaller in diameter than the thread (16).

Not even the best clothing is enough to protect you from
winter storms, so you need shelter. During the winter most Inuit
lived in substantial driftwood and sod houses, but the Central
Inuit wintered on the sea ice, living in snow houses. These round
vaulted structures were ≈3 m high, made of snow blocks cut with
a serrated bone knife. The central room was built above a pit,
with platforms for sleeping, and a long entrance tunnel below the
level of the main room with several low doors to prevent heat
loss. The walls were usually lined with skins suspended from
toggles on the outside of the snow house. This design allowed the
snow walls to stay near freezing, while the inside of the snow

−
house could reach temperatures of 10 20 °C (19).

You need a source of heat and light in your snow house, for
cooking and for melting sea ice for water. You cannot use wood
fires because there are no trees. Instead, Arctic peoples carved
lamps from soap stone and fueled them with rendered seal fat.
These lamps were made from oblong stones between 30 cm and
1 m long; a shallow, sharp-sided depression was carved from the
surface of the stone, and the lamp was equipped with a long,
curtain-like wick made of moss. A well-managed lamp burned
without producing any soot (16).

You also need food. Plants are easy to gather, but for most of
the year this is not an option in the Arctic. During the winter, the
Central Inuit hunted seals, mainly by ambushing them at their
breathing holes. When the sea ice begins to freeze, seals claw
a number of breathing holes in the ice within their home ranges.
As the ice thickens, they maintain these openings, which form
conical chambers under the ice. The Inuit camped in snowy spots
near the seals’ breathing holes. The ice must be covered with
snow to prevent the seals from hearing the hunters’ footsteps and
evading them. Inuit hunted in teams, monitoring as many holes
as possible. The primary tool was a harpoon approximately 1.5 m
long. Both the main shaft and foreshaft were carved from antler.
On the tip was a detachable toggle harpoon head connected to
a heavy braided sinew line. The other end of the harpoon was
made from polar bear bone honed to a sharp point. At each hole,
the hunter opened the hard icy covering using the end of the
harpoon, smelled the interior to make sure it was still in use, and
then used a long, thin, curved piece of caribou antler with a
rounded nob on one end to investigate the chamber’s shape and
plan his thrust. The hunter carefully covered most of the hole with
snow and tethered a bit of down over the remaining opening.
Then, the hunter waited motionless in the frigid darkness, sometimes for hours. When the seal’s arrival disturbed the down, the
hunter struck downward with all his weight. If he speared the seal,



Boyd et al. PNAS | June 28, 2011 | vol. 108 | suppl. 2 | 10919


he held fast to the line connected to his harpoon’s point; the seal
soon tired and could be hauled onto the ice (20).

During the high summer, the Central Inuit used the leister,
a special three-pronged spear with a sharp central spike and two
hinged, backward-facing points, to harvest Arctic char in large
numbers. Later in summer and the fall, they shifted to caribou
hunting. On land, caribou were mainly stalked or driven into
ambush, and kills had to be made from a substantial distance.
This required a bow with the power to propel a heavy arrow at
high velocity. The simplest way to accomplish this is to make
a long bow using a dense elastic wood like yew or osage orange, a
design common in South America, Eastern North America, Africa,
and Europe. This solution was not available to the Inuit, who had
only driftwood (mainly spruce), horn, and antler available. Instead,
they made short bows and used every bowyer’s trick to increase
their power. A bow can be made more powerful by adding wood to
the limbs. However, making the bow thicker increases the stress
within the bow, leading to catastrophic and dangerous failure. This
problem is exacerbated in short bows because the curvature is
greater. Instead, the Inuit made bows that were thin front to back,
wide near the center, and tapering toward the tips. These bows
were also recurved, meaning that the unbraced bow formed
a backward “C” shape. Bracing the bow leads to a compound
curve, a geometry that stores more potential energy. Finally, the
Inuit constructed a unique form of composite bow. When a bow is
bent, the back (the side away from the archer) is stretched, whereas
the belly (the side closer to the archer) is compressed. Wood, horn,
and antler are stronger in compression than tension, so the ability
of a bow to sustain strong bending forces can be enhanced by
adding a material that is strong in tension to the back of the bow. In
central Asia and western North America, sinew was glued to the
back of the bow to strengthen short bows for use on horseback. The
Inuit lashed a woven web of sinew to the backs of their bows,
probably because they had no glues that would work in the moist,
cold conditions of the arctic (21).

This sampler of Inuit lifeways represents only a tiny fraction of
the immense amount of habitat-specific knowledge that is necessary for humans to survive and prosper in the Central Arctic.
To stay warm and get enough to eat, you have to know how to
make and use clothes, snow houses, lamps, harpoons, leisters,
and bows. We have omitted other crucial tools like kayaks, dog
sleds, and sun goggles, and of course, we have had to omit most
of the details necessary to make and use the tools we did mention. Moreover, there is still much more you have to know to stay
alive. Predicting storms, understanding the habits of game species, making baskets, building sledges, and managing dogs—all
require extensive knowledge. Traveling on ice is essential, but
also treacherous, and there is much to know about how the
current temperature, recent weather, and the color and texture
of the ice tell you where and when it is safe to travel. [Nelson
(22) devotes four chapters to ice lore in his book on hunting
among the Inupiaq of northern Alaska.]

So, here is the question: do you think that you could acquire all
of the local knowledge necessary to survive in the arctic on your
own? If superior cognitive ability alone is what allows humans
to adapt to diverse habitats, then it should be possible. Moreover,
to a first approximation, this is the only way that other animals
have to learn about their environments—they must rely mainly on
innate information and individual experience to figure out how to
find food, build shelters, and in some cases to make tools. It is true
that some species have simple traditions, probably maintained by
learning mechanisms like stimulus enhancement and emulation.
However, in every case, the traditions involve behaviors that individuals can and do learn on their own, or combine a handful of
elements learned by multiple individuals (23). There are no convincing examples in which social learning allows the gradual cumulative cultural evolution of complex, locally adaptive behaviors
that individuals could not learn on their own.



Could you make it? We don’t think so.
Two different kinds of natural experiments support the intuition
that forager adaptations are beyond the inventive capacities of
individuals. The first, which might be called “the lost European
explorer experiment,” has been repeated many times during the
past several centuries. Typically some explorers get stranded in an
unfamiliar habitat in which an indigenous population is flourishing. Despite desperate efforts and ample learning time, the
explorers die or suffer terribly owing to the lack of crucial information about how to adapt to the habitat. If they survive, it is
often due to the hospitality of the indigenous population. The

–
Franklin Expedition of 1845 1846 provides a good example (24).
Sir John Franklin, a Fellow of the Royal Society and an experienced Arctic traveler, set out with two ships to explore the
northern coast of North America and find the North West Passage. It was the best-equipped expedition in the history of British
polar exploration, furnished with an extensive library, manned by
a select crew, and stocked with a 3-y supply of food. The expedition spent the winter of 1846 at King William Island, where it
became trapped in the ice. When food ran short, the explorers
abandoned their ships and attempted to escape on foot. Everyone
eventually perished from starvation and scurvy, perhaps exacerbated by lead poisoning from their tinned food.

King William Island is the heart of Netsilik territory, and the
Netsilik have lived there for almost a millennium. King William
Island is rich in animal resources—the main harbor is named
Uqsuqtuuq which means “lots of fat.” The British sailors starved
because they did not have the necessary local knowledge and,
despite being endowed with the same improvisational intelligence as the Inuit and having 2 y to use this intelligence, failed to
learn the skills necessary to subsist in this habitat. Interestingly,
the Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen spent two winters on

−
King William Island in 1903 1904. Amundsen sought out the
Netsilik and learned from them how to make skin clothing, hunt
seals, and manage dog sleds. He and his crew survived and
completed the first successful traverse of the Northwest Passage.
Later he would put these Inuit skills to good use in his race with
Scott to the South Pole. Results from this lost European explorer
experiment, and many others, suggest that intelligence alone is
not enough. For a similar discussion of the ill-fated Burke and
Wills expedition into the Australian outback, see ref. 25.

A second line of evidence comes from the loss of beneficial
technologies in small, isolated populations. For instance, the
Tasmanian tool kit gradually lost complexity after isolation from
mainland Australia at the end of the Holocene (26). Other Pacific island groups have apparently lost useful technologies, such
as canoes, pottery, and the bow and arrow (27). The best
documented example comes from the isolated Polar Inuit of
northwest Greenland. Explorers Elisha Kane and Isaac Hayes
wintered with the Polar Inuit in 1853 and 1861, respectively, and
reported that the Polar Inuit lacked kayaks, leisters, and bows
and arrows and that their snow houses did not have the long
heat-saving entryways that were seen among other Inuit populations. They could not hunt caribou, could only hunt seals
during part of the year, and were unable to harvest arctic char
efficiently, although char were plentiful in local streams (28).
Apparently the population was struck by an epidemic in the
1820s that carried away the older, knowledgeable members of
the group, and according to custom, their possessions had to be
buried with them (29). The Polar Inuit lived without these tools
until about 1862, when they were visited by a group of Inuit who
migrated to Greenland from Baffin Island (28, 29). There is
every reason to believe that these tools would have been useful
between 1820 and 1862. The Polar Inuit population declined
during this period, and the tools were immediately adopted once
they were reintroduced. After their introduction, population size
increased. It is also telling that the kayaks used by the Polar Inuit
around the turn of the century closely resemble the large, beamy



10920 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1100290108 Boyd et al.


kayaks used by Baffin Island Inuit and not the small sleek kayaks
of the West Greenland Inuit. Over the next half century the
Polar Inuit kayak design converged back to the West Greenland
design (30). If this inference is correct it means that for 40 years
(nearly two generations) the Polar Inuit could have benefitted
from the lost knowledge. Moreover, they collectively remembered
kayaks, leisters, and bows and arrows, but did not know how to
make them and could not recreate that knowledge.


Cultural Adaptation Is a Population Process
We think that this body of evidence rules out the idea that superior
cognitive ability alone explains human adaptability; the ability to
cumulatively learn from others must play a crucial role. Although
advocates of the cognitive niche hypothesis focus on cognition,
they do not ignore social learning. They argue that the ability to
learn from others reduces the average cost of acquiring locally
adaptive information. For example, Barrett et al. (13) write:


Cognitive mechanisms underlying cultural transmission coevolved
with improvisational intelligence, distributing the costs of the acquisition of nonrivalrous information over a much greater number of
individuals, and allowing its cost to be amortized over a much greater
number of advantageous events and generations. Unlike other species, cultural transmission in humans results in a ratchet-like accumulation of knowledge. (p 244)


On the surface this seems to be a logical argument. It may be
costly for individuals using improvisational intelligence to discover locally adaptive information, but once it is acquired, others
can get it by teaching or imitation at relatively low cost. As
a result, social learning acts to spread the cost of innovations
over all who benefit. Innovations accumulate, leading to an accumulation of knowledge.

However, this reasoning is mistaken. It is probably true that
learning from others either by teaching or imitation is usually
cheaper than learning on your own. It is like cheating on a test: you
do as well as the person you copy from but avoid all that tedious
studying. However, evolutionary models show that if this is the
only benefit of social learning, there will be no increase in the

–
ability of the population to adapt (31 34). This surprising result
emerges from the coevolutionary processes that affect the kinds of
behaviors that are available to imitate and the psychology that
controls learning and imitation. These evolutionary models of
social learning rest on two assumptions. First, the propensities to
learn and to imitate are part of an evolved psychology shaped by
natural selection. This means that the balance between learning
and imitating will be governed by the relative fitness of the two
modes of behavior—the average fitness of the population is irrelevant. When few individuals imitate, imitators will acquire the
locally adaptive behavior with the same probability as individual
learners. Because they do not pay the cost of learning, imitators
have higher fitness, and the propensity to imitate spreads. As the
number of imitators increases, some imitate individuals who imitated other individuals, who imitated other individuals, and so on
until the chain is rooted in someone who extracted the information
from the environment. As the fraction of imitators in the population increases, these chains extend further.

The second assumption is that the environment varies in time
or space. This means that as chains of imitation get longer, there
is a greater chance that the learner who roots the chain learned
in a different environment than the current environment, either
because the environment has changed since then or because
someone along the chain migrated from a different environment.
The upshot is that on average imitators will be less likely to acquire the locally adaptive behavior than learners. The propensity
to imitate will continue to increase until this reduction in fitness
exactly balances the benefit of avoiding the costs of learning. At



evolutionary equilibrium, the population has the same average
fitness as a population without any imitation. There will be no
increase in the ability to adapt to varying environments, and
cumulative cultural adaptation will not occur.

Although this treatment is very simple, the basic result holds in
more realistic models. The primary insight that emerges from
these models is that imitation is a form of free riding—imitators
scrounge information without producing anything of value. Free
riders increase until they destroy the benefits of free riding.
Realistic levels of relatedness among models and imitators do
not qualitatively change the result (34). The advocates of the
cognitive niche hypothesis err because they take it as unproblematic that once a beneficial innovation arises, it will spread,
and as a result, the capacities for imitation will be favored by
selection. However, to understand the evolution of social
learning psychology you have to know what is available to learn,
and this in turn is affected by the nature of the learning psychology. If imitators are simply information scroungers, then
they will spread until selection no longer favors imitation.

Thinking about the coevolution of the cultural pool of observable behavior and the genes that control the individual and
cultural learning suggests that cultural learning can increase
average fitness only if it increases the ability of the population to
create adaptive information (32). The propensity to imitate
evolves because it is directly beneficial to the individual, but it
may, nonetheless, also benefit the population as a side effect. We
have thought of three ways in which this could happen. First,

—
cultural learning can allow individuals to learn selectively using
environmental cues when they provide clear guidance and
learning from others when they do not. Second, cultural learning
allows the gradual accumulation of small improvements, and if
small improvements are cheaper than big ones, cultural learning
can reduce the population’s learning costs. Finally, by comparing
“teachers” and learning selectively from those that seem most
successful, “pupils” can acquire adaptive information without
making any inferences based on environmental cues. If individuals acquire information from multiple teachers and recombine
this information, this process can create complex cultural adaptations without any intelligence, save that required to distinguish
among more- and less-successful teachers.

The ability to learn or imitate selectively is advantageous because opportunities to learn from experience or by observation
of the world vary. For example, a rare chance observation might
allow a hunter to associate a particular spoor with a wounded
polar bear, or to link the color and texture of ice with its stability
on windy days just after a thaw. Such rare cues allow accurate
low-cost inferences about the environment. However, most
individuals will not observe these cues, and thus making the same
inference will be much more difficult for them. Organisms that
cannot imitate must rely on individual learning, even when it is
difficult and error prone. They are stuck with whatever information that nature offers. In contrast, an organism capable of
cultural learning can afford to be choosy, learning individually
when it is cheap and accurate, and relying on cultural learning
when environmental information is costly or inaccurate. We have
shown (32, 35) that selection can lead to a psychology that causes
most individuals to rely on cultural learning most of the time,
and also simultaneously increases the average fitness of the
population relative to the fitness of a population that does not
rely on cultural information. These models assume that our
learning psychology has a genetically heritable “information
quality threshold” that governs whether an individual relies on
inferences from environmental cues or learns from others.
Individuals with a low information quality threshold rely on even
poor cues, whereas individuals with a high threshold usually
imitate. As the mean information quality threshold in the population increases, the fitness of learners increases because they
are more likely to make accurate or low-cost inferences. At the



Boyd et al. PNAS | June 28, 2011 | vol. 108 | suppl. 2 | 10921


same time, the frequency of imitators also increases. As a consequence, the population does not keep up with environmental
changes as well as a population of individual learners. Eventually, an equilibrium emerges in which individuals deploy both
individual and cultural learning in an optimal mix. At this
equilibrium, the average fitness of the population is higher than
in an ancestral population lacking cultural learning. When most
individuals in the population observe accurate environmental
cues, the equilibrium threshold is low, individual learning predominates, and culture plays little role. However, when it is
usually difficult for people to learn individually, the equilibrium
threshold is high, and most imitate, even when the environmental cues that they do observe indicate a different behavior
than the one they acquire by cultural learning. We take the evidence on Inuit adaptations as indicating that many of the
problems that faced the Inuit are far too difficult for most
individuals to solve. As a result, we interpret this logic as predicting that selection should have favored a psychology that
causes individuals to rely heavily on cultural learning.

The ability to learn culturally can also raise the average fitness
of a population by allowing acquired improvements to accumulate from one generation to the next. Many kinds of traits admit
successive improvements toward some optimum. Bows vary in

—
many dimensions that affect performance such as length,
width, cross section, taper, and degree of recurve. It is typically
more difficult to make large improvements by trial and error
than small ones for the same reasons that Fisher (36) identified
in his “geometric model” of genetic adaptation. In a small
neighborhood in design space, the performance surface is approximately flat, so that even if small changes are made at random, half of them will increase the payoff (unless the design is
already at the optimum). Large changes will improve things only
if they are in the small cone that includes the distant optimum.
Thus, we expect it to be much harder to design a useful bow from
scratch than to tinker with the dimensions of a reasonably good
bow. Now, imagine that the environment varies, so that different
bows are optimal in different environments, perhaps because the
kind of wood available varies. Sometimes a long bow with a round
cross section is best, other times a short flat wide bow is best.
Organisms that cannot imitate must start with whatever initial
guess is provided by their genotype. Over their lifetimes, they can
learn and improve their bow. However, when they die these
improvements disappear with them, and their offspring must
begin again at the genetically inherited initial guess. In contrast,
cultural species can learn how to make bows from others after
these have been improved by experience. Therefore, cultural
learners start their search closer to the best design than pure individual learners and can invest in further improvements. Then,
they can transmit those improvements to the grandkids, and so on
down through the generations until quite sophisticated artifacts
evolve. Historians of technology have demonstrated how this
step-by-step improvement gradually diversifies and improves
tools and other artifacts (37, 38). Even “great insights” often result from lucky accidents or the recombination of elements from
different technological traditions rather than the work of a creative genius who buckles down and racks his brain (39, 40).

The evolution of kayak keels by West Greenland Inuit provides an instructive example of how innovations arise and spread
(41). When hunting marine mammals from a kayak, Inuit
hunters always paddled their kayak hard toward the prey, then
picked up their harpoon and hurled it directly over the bow. This
increased the momentum transferred to the harpoon and prevented capsizing. When firearms first spread in West Greenland,
the Inuit found that they could not pick up and aim their guns
before the kayak veered off course, and thus could only use them
from land or ice floes. In 1824, a prominent Inuit hunter named
Jens Reimer began to experiment with methods to stabilize
kayaks for firearm use. He tried trailing a line behind the kayak,



but this did not work. He then fastened a partially submerged
wooden plate to the kayak’s stern, in imitation of the rudders of

—
European ships. This did not work very well either it was noisy,
and the fastenings tended to fail. Nonetheless, a number of
younger hunters imitated Reimer, perhaps owing to his local
success and prestige. They were not able to produce a quality ayût
(the Greenlandic word for both a ship’s rudder and a kayak keel),
and out of “bashfulness” (41, p 27) hid their crude rudders under
the waterline. They soon discovered that this unintentional innovation allowed them to use guns from their kayaks, and over the
next 50 y the ayût underwent a series of further small improvements, eventually creating the modern form.

Finally, if learners can compare the success of individuals
modeling different behaviors, then a propensity to imitate the
successful can lead to the spread of traits that are correlated with
success, even though imitators have no causal understanding of
the connection. This is obvious when the scope of traits being
compared is narrow. You see that your uncle’s bow shoots farther than yours and notice that it is thicker, but less tapered, and
uses a different plait for attaching the sinew. You copy all three
traits, even though in reality it was just the plaiting that made the
difference. As long as there is a reliable statistical correlation
between plaiting and power, plaiting form trait will change so as
to increase power. Causal understanding is helpful because it
permits the exclusion of irrelevant traits like the bow’s color.
However, causal understanding need not be very precise as long
as the correlation is reliable. Copying irrelevant traits like
thickness or color will only add noise to the process. By recombining different components of technology from different but
still successful individuals, copiers can produce both novel and
increasingly adaptive tools and techniques over generations,
without any improvisational insights. An Inuit might copy the
bow design from the best bowyer in his community but adopt the
sinew plaiting used by the best hunter in a neighboring community. The result could be a better bow than anyone made in
the previous generation without anyone inventing anything new.

Consistent with this, laboratory and field evidence suggests that
both children and adults are predisposed to copy a wide range of
traits from successful or prestigious people (42). Advertisers clearly
know this. After all, what does Michael Jordan really know about
underwear? Recent work in developmental psychology shows that

                                          young children readily attend to cues of reliability, success, confi
dence, and attention when choosing who to learn from (43, 44).
Even infants selectively attend to knowledgeable adults rather than
their own mothers in novel situations (45). This feature of our
cultural learning psychology fits a priori evolutionary predictions,
emerges spontaneously in experiments, develops early without instruction, and operates largely outside conscious awareness.

These models predict that an adaptive evolved psychology will
often cause individuals to acquire the behaviors they observe used
by in others even though inferences based on environmental cues
suggest that alternative behaviors would be better. In a species
capable of acquiring behavior by teaching or imitation, individuals are exposed to two different kinds of cues that they can use to
solve local adaptive problems. Like any other organism, they can
make inferences based on cues from the environment. However,
they also observe the behaviors of a sample of their population.
When most individuals can solve the adaptive problem using
environmental cues alone, the models predict that an optimal

                                          learning psychology will result in social learning playing a signifi
cant but relatively modest role. Many people will rely on their own
inferences, but some will copy to avoid learning costs. However,
often only a minority will be able to solve the adaptive problem on
the basis of environmental cues alone, because the appropriate
environmental cues are rare or the adaptive problem is too
complex. Then, if the environment is not too variable, an adaptive
psychology will evolve in which most people ignore environmental
cues and adopt behaviors that are common in the sample of the



10922 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1100290108 Boyd et al.


population they observe. They modify these behaviors rarely, or
only at the margin, and as a result local adaptations evolve
gradually often over many generations.


Evidence for Cultural Adaptation
The cultural niche hypothesis and the cognitive niche hypothesis
make sharply different predictions about how local adaptations
are acquired and understood. The cognitive niche hypothesis
posits that technologies are adaptive because improvisational intelligence allows some individuals to figure out how they work and
why they are better than alternatives. These acquired understandings of the world are then shared, allowing others to acquire
the same causal understanding without costly individual investigation. In contrast, we argue that cultural evolution operating
over generations has gradually accumulated and recombined
adaptive elements, eventually creating adaptive packages beyond
the causal understanding of the individuals who use them. In some
cases elements of causal understanding may be passed along, but
this is not necessary. Often individuals will have no idea why
certain elements are included in a design, nor any notion of
whether alternative designs would be better. We expect cultural
learners to first acquire the local practices and occasionally experiment or modify them. At times this will mean that cultural
learning will overrule their direct experience, evolved motivations,
or reliably developing intuitions.

Several lines of evidence support the cultural learning hypothesis.


–
The anthropological literature on child development (46 48)
indicates that children and adolescents acquire most of their
cultural information by learning from older individuals who
typically discourage questions from young learners and rarely
provide causal explanations of their behavior. Kids practice adult
behaviors, often using toy versions of adult tools, during mixedage play, and little experimentation is observed, except that
necessary to master the adult repertoire (49, 50).

The reliance of young learners on carefully observing and
imitating the local repertoires revealed in the anthropological
record converges with recent experiments on imitation (51, 52).
In these experiments, an adult performs a behavior like opening
a complex puzzle box to get a reward. The adult’s behavior
includes both necessary and unnecessary actions. A subject, either a child or a chimpanzee, observes the behavior. Children’s
performance on such tasks in both western and small-scale societies differs in important ways from that of chimpanzees.
Children accurately copy all steps, including steps that direct
visual inspection would suggest are unnecessary. Children seem
to implicitly assume that if the model performed an action, it was
probably important, even if they do not understand why. Chimpanzees do not seem to make this assumption; they mainly skip
the unnecessary steps, leading them to develop more efficient
repertoires than children (53) in these experimental settings.

Many examples indicate that people often do not understand
how adaptive practices work or why they are effective. For example, in the New World, the traditional use of chili peppers in
meat recipes likely protected people from food-borne pathogens
(54). This use of chili peppers is particularly interesting because
they are inherently unpalatable. Peppers contain capsaicin,
a chemical defense evolved in the genus Capsicum to prevent
mammals (especially rodents) from eating their fruits. Nonhuman primates and human infants find peppers aversive because capsaicin stimulates pain receptors in the mouth. Efforts to
inculcate a taste for chilies in rats using reinforcement procedures have failed (55). However, human food preferences are
heavily influenced by the preferences of those around us (56), so
we overcome our innate aversion and actually learn to enjoy
chilies. Psychological research indicates that people do not get
accustomed to the chemical burning sensation. Instead, observational learning leads people to reinterpret their pain as plea


sure or excitement (57). So, New World peoples learned to
appropriately use and enjoy chili peppers without understanding
their antimicrobial properties, and to do this they had to overcome an instinctive aversion that we share with other mammals.

Fijian food taboos provide another example of this process.
Many marine species in the Fijian diet contain toxins, which are
particularly dangerous for pregnant women and perhaps nursing
infants. Food taboos targeting these species during pregnancy
and lactation prohibit women from eating these species and reduce the incidence of fish poisoning during this period. Although
women in these communities all share the same food taboos,
they offer quite different causal explanations for them, and little
information is exchanged among women save for the taboos
themselves (58). The taboos are learned and are not related to
pregnancy sickness aversions. Analyses of the transmission
pathways for these taboos indicate the adaptive pattern is sustained by selective learning from prestigious women.


Culture and Maladaptation
Cultural adaptation comes with a built-in tradeoff. The cumulative cultural evolution of complex, hard-to-learn adaptations
requires individuals to adopt the behavior of those around them
even if it conflicts with their own inferences. However, this same
propensity will cause individuals to acquire any common behavior as long as it is not clearly contradicted by their own
inferences. This means that if there are cognitive or social processes that make maladaptive ideas common, and these ideas are
not patently false or harmful, people will adopt these ideas as
well. Moreover, it is clear that several such processes exist. Here
are a couple of examples. For a longer discussion, see ref. 10.


Weak Cognitive Biases Can Favor the Spread of Maladaptive Beliefs
or Practices over Generations. Laboratory diffusion chain studies
clearly document that biases that have undetectable effects on
individual decisions can have very strong effects when iterated
over “generations” in the laboratory (59). The same effect may
lead to the spread of false beliefs in natural populations. For
example, Boyer (60) argues that a number of cognitive biases
explain the spread of supernatural beliefs and account for the
widespread occurrence of folktales about ghosts and zombies.


Adaptive Social Learning Biases Can Lead to Maladaptive Outcomes.
A model’s attributes provide indirect evidence about whether it
is useful to imitate her. If she is successful, then by imitating her
you can increase your chances of acquiring traits that gave rise to
her success. If she is more similar to you than alternative models,
her behavior may work better in your situation. If her behavior is
more common than alternatives, then it is likely to be adaptive
because learning increases the frequency of adaptive behaviors.
An evolved cultural learning psychology that incorporates such
biases increases the chance of acquiring beneficial beliefs and
behaviors. However, these same biases can sometimes lead to the
spread of maladaptive beliefs and practices. For example, the
tendency to imitate the prestigious, or those making credibilityenhancing displays of commitment, can lead to a “runaway”
process analogous to sexual selection (10), and this may explain
the cultural evolution of maladaptive cultural systems in which
people risk life and limb to summit icy peaks or achieve spiritual
perfection in celibate seclusion (61).


Culture Is Part of Human Biology and Has Profoundly
Shaped Human Evolution
We have recounted two contrasting accounts of the nature and
origins of human uniqueness. On the one hand, there is a widespread view is that people are like other mammals, just a lot
smarter—in essence, we are brainy, hairless chimpanzees. We
have a uniquely flexible cognitive system that lets us make causal
inferences in a wide range of environments and use that in


Boyd et al. PNAS | June 28, 2011 | vol. 108 | suppl. 2 | 10923


formation to create much better tools, and these differences have
allowed us spread across the world, dominating the world’s biota
like no other creature. By contrast, we argue that individuals are
not nearly smart enough to solve the myriad adaptive problems
they face in any of their many habitats. Even experts lack a detailed causal understanding of the tools and techniques that
permit them to survive. High-fidelity cultural learning allows
human populations to solve these problems because it allows
selective learning and the accumulation of small improvements
over time. Of course, sophisticated, flexible cognition is important too. However, the degree of cognitive flexibility varies
widely in nature—chimpanzees can solve problems that baffle
monkeys, and monkeys are geniuses compared with opossums.
Nonetheless, no species occupies as wide a range of habitats as
Homo sapiens. In contrast, there is a sharp break between human
cultural learning capacities and those of even our closest relatives. As a result, it is more apt to think of humans occupying
a cultural niche than a cognitive niche.

The evolution of the psychological capacities that give rise to
cumulative cultural evolution is one of the key events in our
evolutionary history. The availability of large amounts of valuable cultural information would have favored the evolution of
bigger brains equipped to acquire, store, organize, and retrieve
cultural information, a fact that may explain the rapid increase in
human encephalization over the last 500,000 y and the evolution
of specialized cognitive abilities that emerge early in life, such as
theory of mind, selective social referencing (45), overimitation
(52), a functional understanding of artifacts (62), and the use of
taxonomic inheritance and category-based induction for living


1. Mourre V, Villa P, Henshilwood CS (2010) Early use of pressure flaking on lithic

artifacts at Blombos Cave, South Africa. Science 330:659–662.
2. Klein R (2009) The Human Career (Univ Chicago Press, Chicago), 3rd Ed.
3. Rowe KC, Reno ML, Richmond DM, Adkins RM, Steppan SJ (2008) Pliocene colonization

and adaptive radiations in Australia and New Guinea (Sahul): Multilocus systematics of
the old endemic rodents (Muroidea: Murinae). Mol Phylogenet Evol 47:84–101.
4. Wozencraft WC (2005) Order Carnivora. Mammal Species of the World: A Taxonomic

and Geographic Reference, eds Wilson DE, Reeder DM (Johns Hopkins Univ Press,
Baltimore), 3rd Ed, pp 532–628.
5. White CM, Olsen PD, Kiff LF (1994) New World vultures to guineafowl, family

Falconidae (falcons and caracaras). Handbook of Birds of the World, eds del Hoyo J,
Ellio A, Sargatal J (Lynx Edicions, Barcelona), Vol 2, pp 216–275.
6. Bruce MD (1999): Family Tytonidae (barn-owls). Handbook of Birds of the World:

Vol.5: Barn-owls to Hummingbirds, eds del Hoyo J, Elliott A, Sargatal J (Lynx Edicions,
Barcelona), pp 34–75.
7. Gilligan I (2010) The Prehistoric development of clothing: Archaeological implications

of a thermal model. J Arch Method Theory 17:15–80.
8. Kaplan H, Hill K, Lancaster J, Hurtado AM (2000) A theory of human life history

evolution: Diet, intelligence, and longevity. Evol Anthropol 9:156–185.
9. Richerson PJ, Boyd R, Henrich J (2010) Colloquium paper: Gene-culture coevolution in

the age of genomics. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(Suppl 2):8985–8992.
10. Richerson P, Boyd R (2005) Not by Genes Alone (Univ Chicago Press, Chicago).
11. Tooby J, DeVore I (1987) Primate Models of Hominid Behavior, ed Kinzey W (SUNY

Press, New York), pp 183–237.
12. Cosmides L, Tooby J (2001) in The Evolution of Intelligence, eds Sternberg RJ,

Kaufman JC (Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ), pp 145–199.
13. Barrett C, Cosmides L, Tooby J (2007) The hominid entry into the cognitive niche.

Evolution of Mind, Fundamental Questions and Controversies, eds Gangestad S,
Simpson J (Guilford Press, NY), pp 241–248.
14. Pinker S (2010) The cognitive niche: Coevolution of intelligence, sociality, and

language. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(Suppl 2):8993–8999.
15. Muller MN, Thompson ME, Wrangham RW (2006) Male chimpanzees prefer mating


with old females. Curr Biol 16:2234–2238.

16. Issenman BK (1997) The Sinews of Survival (UBC Press, Vancouver).
17. Otak LA (2005) Iniqsimajug: Caribou-skin preparation in Igloolik, Nunavut. Arctic

Clothing, eds King JC, Pauksztat B, Storrie R (McGill-Queens Univ Press, Montreal).
18. Meeks N, Cartwright CR (2005) Caribou and seal hair: Examination by scanning

electron microscope. Arctic Clothing, eds King JC, Pauksztat B, Storrie R (McGillQueens Univ Press, Montreal).
19. Damas D (1984) in Handbook of North American Indians: Vol 5. Arctic, ed Damas D

(Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC), pp 39–396.
20. Balikci A (1989) The Netsilik Eskimo (Waveland Press, Long Grove, IL).
21. Mason OT (2007) North American Bows and Quivers (Skyhorse Publishing, New York).
22. Nelson R (1969) Hunters of the Northern Ice (Univ Chicago Press, Chicago).
23. Tennie C, Call J, Tomasello M (2009) Ratcheting up the ratchet: On the evolution of


cumulative culture. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 364:2405–2415.



kinds (63). The presence of culturally evolved techniques and
products—such as fire, cooking, weapons, and tools—created
new selection pressures acting on our bones, muscles, teeth, and
guts (9).

Culture has opened up a vast range of evolutionary vistas not
available to noncultural species. Nonetheless, culture is as much
a part of human biology as our peculiar pelvis. This approach
contrasts with the common view that culture and biology are in
a tug-of-war for control of human behavior. This common view
probably taps into a deep vein of Western thought, which itself
may be the result of evolved cognitive biases (64), but it makes
little sense. The ancestral condition in the human lineage is
a psychology that does not permit cumulative cultural evolution.
Despite earnest efforts, chimpanzees cannot be socialized to
become humans and have little or no cumulative cultural evo
lution. Beginning early in human ontogeny, our psychology
allows us to learn from others, powerfully and unconsciously
motivates us to do so, and shapes the kind of traits that evolve.
So it does not make sense to ask, does culture overcome biology?
The right question to ask is, how do genetic and cultural inheritance interact to produce the observed patterns of human
psychology and behavior (65)?


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Clark Barrett for very useful comments on
a previous draft of this article, and two anonymous referees for their help.
This work was supported in part by National Institutes of Health Grant
RC1TW008631-02 (to R.B.) and the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (J.H.).


24. Lambert A (2011) The Gates of Hell: Sir John Franklin’s Tragic Quest for the North

West Passage (Yale Univ Press, New Haven, CT).
25. Henrich J, McElreath R (2003) The evolution of cultural evolution. Evol Anthropol 12:


123–135.

26. Henrich J (2004) Demography and cultural evolution: Why adaptive cultural processes

produced maladaptive losses in Tasmania. Am Antiq 69:197–218.
27. Kline MA, Boyd R (2010) Population size predicts technological complexity in Oceania.


Proc Biol Sci 277:2559–2564.

28. Mary-Rousselière G (1996) Qitdlarssuaq, The Story of a Polar Migration (Wuerz

Publishing, Winnipeg, MB, Canada).
29. Rasmussen K (1908) People of the Polar North (Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co.,

London).
30. Golden H (2006) Kayaks of Greenland, The history and Development of the

Greenlandic Hunting Kayak, 1600–2000 (Whitehouse Grocery Press, Portland, OR).
31. Rogers AR (1988) Does biology constrain culture? Am Anthropol 90:819–831.
32. Boyd R, Richerson PJ (1995) Why does culture increase human adaptability? Ethol


Sociobiol 16:125–143.

33. Rendell L, Fogarty L, Laland KN (2010) Rogers’ paradox recast and resolved:

Population structure and the evolution of social learning strategies. Evolution 64:

534–548.

34. Lehmann L, Feldman MW, Kaeuffer R (2010) Cumulative cultural dynamics and the

coevolution of cultural innovation and transmission: An ESS model for panmictic and
structured populations. J Evol Biol 23:2356–2369.
35. Boyd R, Richerson PJ (1988) Social Learning: Psychological and Biological Approaches,

eds Zentall T, Galef BG (Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ), pp 29–48.
36. Fisher RA (1930) The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection (Oxford Univ Press, Oxford).
37. Basalla G (1988) The Evolution of Technology (Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, UK).
38. Petroski H (1992) The Evolution of Useful Things: How Everyday Artifacts—From Forks

and Pins to Paper Clips and Zippers—Came to Be as They Are (Vintage Books, New
York).
39. Henrich J (2010) Innovation in Cultural Systems: Contributions from Evolutionary

Anthropology, eds Shennan S, O’Brien M (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA), pp 99–210.
40. Johnson S (2010) Where Good Ideas Come From: The Natural History of Innovation

(Riverhead Hardcover, New York).
41. Scavenius JP (1975) The Greenland Kayak and Its Accessories (Nyt Nordisk Forlag

Library, Copenhagen).
42. Henrich J, Gil-White FJ (2001) The evolution of prestige: Freely conferred deference as

a mechanism for enhancing the benefits of cultural transmission. Evol Hum Behav 22:

165–196.

43. Birch SAJ, Vauthier SA, Bloom P (2008) Three- and four-year-olds spontaneously use

others’ past performance to guide their learning. Cognition 107:1018–1034.
44. Birch SAJ, Akmal N, Frampton KL (2010) Two-year-olds are vigilant of others’ non
verbal cues to credibility. Dev Sci 13:363–369.
45. Stenberg G (2009) Selectivity in infant social referencing. Infancy 14:457–473.
46. Lancy D (1996) Playing on Mother Ground: Cultural Routines for Children’s

Development (Guilford Press, New York).



10924 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1100290108 Boyd et al.


47. Lancy D (2009) The Anthropology of Childhood: Cherubs, Chattel and Changlings

(Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, UK).
48. Lancy D (2010) Learning from nobody: The limited role of teaching in folk models of

children’s development. Childhood in the Past 3:79–106.
49. Hewlett BS, Fouts HN, Boyette AH, Hewlett BL (2011) Social learning among Congo

Basin hunter-gatherers. Phil Trans Roy Soc B 366:1168–1178.
50. MacDonald K (2007) Cross-cultural comparison of learning in human hunting:

Implications for life history evolution. Hum Nat 18:386–402.
51. Nielsen M, Tomaselli K (2010) Overimitation in Kalahari Bushman children and the

origins of human cultural cognition. Psychol Sci 21:729–736.
52. Lyons DE, Young AG, Keil FC (2007) The hidden structure of overimitation. Proc Natl

Acad Sci USA 104:19751–19756.

53. Whiten A, McGuigan N, Marshall-Pescini S, Hopper LM (2009) Emulation, imitation,

over-imitation and the scope of culture for child and chimpanzee. Philos Trans R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci 364:2417–2428.

54. Billing J, Sherman PW (1998) Antimicrobial functions of spices: Why some like it hot. Q

Rev Biol 73:3–49.

55. Rozin P, Gruss L, Berk G (1979) Reversal of innate aversions: Attempts to induce

a preference for chili peppers in rats. J Comp Physiol Psychol 93:1001–1014.
56. Birch LL (1987) Children’s food preferences: Developmental patterns and environmental

influence. Ann Child Dev 4:171–208.



57. Rozin P, Mark M, Schiller D (1981) The role of desensitization to capsaicin in chili

pepper ingestion and preference. Chem Senses 6:23–31.
58. Henrich J, Henrich N (2011) The evolution of cultural adaptations: Fijian taboos

during pregnancy and lactation protect against marine toxins. Proc Biol Sci 366:

1139–1148.

59. Beppu A, Griffiths TL (2009) Iterated learning and the cultural ratchet. Proceedings

of the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (Cognitive Science
Society, Austin, TX).
60. Boyer P (2002) Religion Explained (Basic Books, New York).
61. Henrich J (2009) The evolution of costly displays, cooperation, and religion: Credibility

enhancing displays and their implications for cultural evolution. Evol Hum Behav 30:

244–260.

62. Wohlgelernter S, Diesendruck G, Markson L (2010) What is a conventional object

function? The effects of intentionality and consistency of use. J Cogn Dev 11:269–292.
63. Atran S, Medin DL (2008) The Native Mind and the Cultural Construction of Nature


(MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
64. Bloom P (2004) Decartes’ Baby: How the Science of Child Development Explains What


Makes Us Human (Basic Books, New York).
65. Henrich J, Heine SJ, Norenzayan A (2010) The weirdest people in the world? Behav


Brain Sci 33:61–83; discussion 83–135.



Boyd et al. PNAS | June 28, 2011 | vol. 108 | suppl. 2 | 10925


