Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

## SOTOPIA: I NTERACTIVE E VALUATION FOR S OCIAL I NTELLIGENCE IN L ANGUAGE A GENTS


**Xuhui Zhou** _[∗]_ **Hao Zhu** _[∗]_


**Leena Mathur** **Ruohong Zhang** **Zhengyang Qi** **Haofei Yu**
**Louis-Philippe Morency** **Yonatan Bisk** **Daniel Fried** **Graham Neubig** **Maarten Sap**
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

[https://sotopia.world](https://sotopia.world)























Figure 1: SOTOPIA: An **open-ended social interaction environment** . In each episode, SOTOPIA first samples a social scenario context, goals, and characters, and then assigns a social goal and character to each agent
involved. Agents (artificial agents or humans) in SOTOPIA role-play characters while attempting to achieve
their goals. The agents’ performance is evaluated through a multi-dimensional framework, SOTOPIA-EVAL.


A BSTRACT


_Humans are social beings_ ; we pursue social goals in our daily interactions, which
is a crucial aspect of social intelligence. Yet, AI systems’ abilities in this realm
remain elusive. We present SOTOPIA, an open-ended environment to simulate
complex social interactions between artificial agents and evaluate their social intelligence. In our environment, agents role-play and _interact_ under a wide variety of scenarios; they coordinate, collaborate, exchange, and compete with each
other to achieve complex social goals. We simulate the role-play interaction between LLM-based agents and humans within this task space and evaluate their
performance with a holistic evaluation framework called SOTOPIA-EVAL. With
SOTOPIA, we find significant differences between these models in terms of their
social intelligence, and we identify a subset of SOTOPIA scenarios, SOTOPIAhard, that is generally challenging for all models. We find that on this subset, GPT4 achieves a significantly lower goal completion rate than humans and struggles to
exhibit social commonsense reasoning and strategic communication skills. These
findings demonstrate SOTOPIA’s promise as a general platform for research on
evaluating and improving social intelligence in artificial agents.


_∗_ Equal contributors.


1


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1 I NTRODUCTION


Humans’ ability to achieve and balance complex, multifaceted social goals in our interactions with
others is a crucial part of our social intelligence as a species (Kihlstrom & Cantor, 2020; Tomasello,
2021). Even a simple social goal such as sharing a blanket with a friend requires reconciling one’s
need to stay warm with the friend’s need for personal space (Figure 1). Successful interaction
requires understanding others’ intentions and beliefs (Premack & Woodruff, 1978), while taking into
account different—and potentially conflicting—social norms and expectations (Goffman, 1959).


Even though recent AI systems have exhibited impressive social skills in certain settings, their social
intelligence has yet to be ascertained in a robust way (Shapira et al., 2023a; Ullman, 2023). On one
hand, many of the social intelligence benchmarks are not interactive (Sap et al., 2019; Le et al.,
2019; Zadeh et al., 2019b), which is sub-optimal for evaluating social intelligence ((Mehri et al.,
2022; Hoppler et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023)). On the other hand, existing interactive evaluation falls
short of studying diverse goal-driven behaviors (Zhang et al., 2018b; Park et al., 2023) or focuses on
specific tasks (Wang et al., 2019; Padmakumar et al., 2022; FAIR et al., 2022).


To study _dynamic_ and _goal-driven_ social intelligence, we present SOTOPIA (Figure 1), an openended general-domain environment that situates social agents in diverse social scenarios. SOTOPIA
is _interactive_ : in multi-turn simulated communication, agents can use verbal and non-verbal communication together with physical actions. [1] It also has a _diverse task space_ : the combination of automatically generated scenarios, goals, characters, relationships, and other agents’ policies creates a
huge and diverse space of tasks. SOTOPIA evaluates agent performance from multiple dimensions
besides the completion of social goals.


In SOTOPIA, we create 90 social scenarios spanning a range of cooperative, competitive, and mixed
social goals along with 40 characters with individual personalities, occupations, secrets, background
stories, and relationships with other characters (§2), the cross product of which constructs a large
task space. Through sampling tasks from this space, we simulate the interaction “episodes” where
agents role-play their respective characters and interact based on their private social goals. In this
simulation, we not only create and use LLM-based agents, but also involve human participants in
role-playing to study the differences between the models’ and humans’ social intelligence.


To evaluate _multi-faceted_ social interactions, we cannot only consider completing major social goals,
as humans’ motives often balance multiple implicit goals, such as maintaining relationships, preserving finances, gaining information, keeping secrets, and following social rules. Therefore, we
propose SOTOPIA-EVAL (§3) to evaluate agents using multi-dimensional criteria inspired by previous research on sociology, psychology, and economics. We then apply SOTOPIA-EVAL to the
episodes in the aforementioned simulation by leveraging both humans and GPT-4 as judges. We find
GPT-4 could serve as a proxy to human judgments on SOTOPIA-EVAL, especially for the criteria
of goal completion, maintaining finances, and preserving relationships.


Despite larger LLMs typically achieving higher social intelligence than smaller ones, they fall short
of collaborating and competing with humans on more challenging tasks (§7). They are also highly
influenced by their conversational partners and at risk of divulging secrets and violating social rules.
However, we do find a few cases, where the models produced creative solutions to a problem (§6).


Our contributions are as follows: (A) We introduce and will release SOTOPIA, a general-domain
interactive environment for simulating goal-oriented social interactions. Designed to be extensible,
SOTOPIA could be used by future researchers to study and train artificial social intelligence agents
with more challenging and diverse tasks. (B) We create SOTOPIA-EVAL, a multi-dimensional
evaluation framework that analyzes agent performance from a range of social dimensions. (C) We
automate SOTOPIA-EVAL by leveraging LLMs, which we find could serve as a proxy of human
judgment on some of the social dimensions, especially goal completion. (D) We demonstrate that
by leveraging SOTOPIA, we can assess disparities in social intelligence between models, as well as
disparities between models and humans.


In summary, SOTOPIA is a novel, challenging, and interactive benchmark that could serve as the
perfect test-bed and potential incubator for social intelligence in language agents.


1 represented in text form.


2


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2 SOTOPIA INTERACTION ENVIRONMENT


To address the challenge of evaluating social intelligence interactively, we seek an environment with
the following desiderata: (1) _Realistic_ : this is to evaluate and understand artificial agents’ behavior under realistic scenarios; (2) _Mixed utilities_ : human motives are often driven by both explicit
and implicit incentives, and the environment should be able to evaluate the agents’ performance on
multiple dimensions; (3) _Open-ended_ : to support large-scale simulation and evaluation, the environment should be able to produce new tasks satisfying the previous two desiderata procedurally,
without heavy human intervention.


In this section, we introduce SOTOPIA and explain why SOTOPIA is well-suited for interactive
evaluation of social intelligence. The task space includes realistic scenarios, characters, and relationships which are automatically generated with manual inspection (§2.1). An episode includes
the interaction between agents role-playing different characters who each perform actions (e.g.
speak("Hello Bob!"), smile and nod, and call 911) to achieve social goals drawn from the task
space (§2.2). We direct readers to Appendix C for a formal definition of the SOTOPIA environment.


2.1 T ASK SPACE


In this paper, we consider tasks that involve two agents, but SOTOPIA is more general and could
support the interaction among more than two agents. A task in SOTOPIA is the combination of
a _scenario context_, _characters_, and their _social goals_, providing the background of the interaction.
Each episode consists of multiple turns of interaction between agents. In this paper, we focus on
locally-consistent social goals within a relatively short timespan in single episodes, despite that in
the real world, people’s social goals are consistently changing from time to time. Note that agents
have different observations for the same task: each agent can observe the scenario, their own social
goal, and their own character profile. Other agents’ social goals are invisible and other agents’
character profiles are partially observable, depending on the relationship between the agents.


**Complexity of task space** The combinations of a scenario context, social goals, characters, and
their relationships can shape the space of the optimal behaviors of agents. Consider a persuasion
task, “asking the romantic partner to stop texting during FaceTime.” If a romantic partner values
conformity, one good way for an agent to reach this goal is to discuss the problem from a social
norm perspective; however, if a romantic partner is particularly caring and good at understanding
feelings, it might be better to express subjective emotion. _Interaction partner’s policy_ also heavily
influences the optimal behaviors. Consider another task illustrated in Figure 1, “ _selling BMW Z3_
_for no less than $3,400_ ”. If the buyer gives a high offer, the seller might want to exploit the buyer’s
eagerness to buy the car and ask for a higher price; while if the buyer gives a low-ball offer, the
seller could give reasons why the car is worth more than that or threaten to walk away. When
more information (e.g. about personality, decision-making styles, or occupation) is known before
the interaction, the seller and buyer could use that knowledge to adjust their strategies as well. The
cross-product of the diverse spaces of scenario context, social goals, characters, relationship profiles,
and other players’ policies creates a large task space that poses not only a realistic challenge but also
an opportunity to evaluate and develop social intelligence in artificial agents. For the rest of this
subsection, we will present the design and generation of each axis of the task space.


**Characters** As mentioned above, the design of character profiles should include several attributes
that would influence decision-making. We consider the following ones (inspired by Wang et al.
(2019)): name, gender, age, occupation, pronouns, personality traits (Goldberg, 1992), moral values
(Graham et al., 2011), Schwartz personal values (Cieciuch & Davidov, 2012), and decision-making
style (Hamilton et al., 2016), which are generated through leveraging GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023). To
give the conversations more background, after generating the above attributes, we prompt GPT-4 to
generate secret and public information. Two examples of characters are shown in Figure 1. It should
be noted that, although we generated a diverse set of characters, this is still a small portion of the
possible character space. Our analysis focuses on 40 characters generated in the aforementioned
fashion, and future research using SOTOPIA can easily generate an expanded character set.


**Relationships** Relationships in SOTOPIA have the following effects: (1) scenarios often have
_relationship constraints_ ; for example, a family relationship is required for a family dinner scenario,


3


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


but not for a scenario involving finding mutual friends at a party; (2) different relationships influence
an agent’s observation of the profiles of other agents during interactions; for example, a stranger
may not have knowledge about another agent’s occupation, while a romantic partner may know the
other agent’s personality. To make sampling characters easier for (1) and controlling the interaction
context easier for (2), we consider five types of relationships: _family_, _friend_, _romantic_, _acquaintance_,
and _stranger_ . Refer to Appendix B for the limitations of this approach and potential extensions.


We will discuss how (1) is performed in the following paragraphs, while for (2), we created a rulebased mechanism to determine whether the parts of the profiles are visible to the other agent. If
two agents are in family, friends, or romantic relationships, they can see everything on each other’s
profile except for secrets. Two acquaintances can see the name, occupation, gender pronouns, and
public info on each other’s profile. Two strangers can see nothing on each other’s profile. Similar to
characters, we prompt GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) to automatically generate relationships based on the
character pool and manually validate relationships for consistency.


**Scenarios** We consider scenarios where the agents have both shared and private information about
the social task. The shared information is the scenario context: the location, time and other shared
information of the social interaction, e.g. “ _One person is selling an antique chair for $100 on his_
_patio. Another person is interested in this chair._ ” The private information is the social goals which
are only visible to the respective agents, e.g. “ _Your goal is to buy the chair for $80._ ” is only visible
to the buyer agent, while “ _Your goal is to sell the chair for $90._ ” is only visible to the seller agent.
However, the as mentioned above combination of scenarios and characters is not arbitrary, since
scenarios often imply constraints for the agents. We call this kind of constraint _scenario constraints_ .
In this paper, we mainly consider _relationship constraints_ which determines the types of relationships between the sampled characters. Similar to characters and relationships, scenarios, including
context, goals, and constraints are generated through prompting GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023). To generate
high-quality scenarios with enough coverage of different types of social interactions (as shown in
Figure 1), we randomly sample data from previous datasets, including Forbes et al. 2020; Sap et al.
2019; Lewis et al. 2017; Ziems et al. 2023; He et al. 2018; 2017, and use them in the prompts to
“inspire” GPT-4. The authors manually validate and make necessary changes to all of the generated
scenarios and remove 10% of scenarios according to E.2.


2.2 SOTOPIA EPISODES


During the interaction, models and humans are given the social context, a character profile and a
corresponding social goal. We will call these models and humans with characters and goals _agents_,
which take turns (in a round-robin fashion, i.e. Agent 1 acts first and then Agent 2 acts and so on)
to perform actions in an _episode_ . At their own turn, the agent can choose to speak, use non-verbal
communication (e.g., hug or smile in Figure H.1), or take a physical action (e.g., play music
in Figure H.2), which are all important components of social interactions (De Stefani & De Marco,
2019). Once an agent chooses one of these three discrete action categories, the agent then generates
a specific action, i.e. what to say, what gesture to make, etc., in text form. Outside of the three
actions, the agent can also choose to do nothing (none) to express silence or allow another agent
to finish, or choose to leave to end the episode. We set the limit of the turns to 20, as we found
humans normally can finish most of the tasks in 20 turns. An episode ends either because one of the
agents chooses to leave, or it reaches the limit of turns. An example episode is shown in Figure 1.


3 SOTOPIA-EVAL: HOLISTIC SOCIAL AGENT EVALUATION FRAMEWORK


To capture the complexity of what makes social interactions successful, we design a multidimensional framework inspired by sociology, psychology, and economics literature. For each
episode, agents are scored along each of the following dimensions at the end of the interaction. In
the following paragraphs, we itemize all seven dimensions in SOTOPIA, each with a score range [2]
in **[lower bound–upper bound]** form, the explanation, and the literature inspiring us.


**Goal Completion (G** **OAL** **) [0–10]** is the extent to which the agent achieved their goals. Agents’
social goals, defined by the environment, are the primary drivers of their behavior (Weber, 1978).


2
The metric ranges contain semantic implications, for example, a negative value in R EL indicates the relationship gets worse while a positive value indicates the relationship improves.


4


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


**Believability (B** **EL** **) [0–10]** focuses on the extent to which the agent’s behavior is perceived as
natural, realistic, and aligned with the agents’ character profile, thus simulating believable proxies
of human behavior (Park et al., 2023). Specifically, we consider the following criteria: _1. If the_
_agent interacts with others in a natural and realistic manner (naturalness). 2. If the actions of the_
_agent align with their character traits e.g., personality, values, etc. (consistency)._


**Knowledge (K** **NO** **) [0–10]** captures the agent’s ability to actively acquire new information. This
dimension is motivated by the fact that curiosity, i.e., the desire to desire to know or learn, is a fundamental human trait (Reiss, 2004; Maslow, 1943). Specifically, we consider the following criteria:
_What information the agent has gained through the interaction, whether the information the agent_
_has gained is new to them, and whether the information the agent has gained is important to them._


**Secret (S** **EC** **) [-10-0]** [3] measures the need for agents (humans) to keep their secretive information or
intention private (Reiss, 2004). From a game theory perspective, leaking secrets often leads to a loss
of utility (Gilpin & Sandholm, 2006). However, revealing secrets can be a powerful tool to build
trust and thus improve relationships (Jaff´e & Douneva, 2020). In this dimension, we ask _what secret_
_or secretive intention the participant wants to keep, and whether they keep it successfully._


**Relationship (R** **EL** **) [-5–5]** captures the fundamental human need for social connection and belonging (Maslow, 1943; B´enabou & Tirole, 2006). In this dimension, we ask _what relationship_
_the participant has with the other agent(s) before the interaction, and then evaluate if the agents’_
_interactions with others help preserve or enhance their personal relationships._ Additionally, we
ascertain whether these interactions also impact the social status or the reputation of the agent.


**Social Rules (S** **OC** **) [-10–0]** concerns norms, regulations, institutional arrangements, and rituals. We
differentiate between two types of social rules: _social norms_ and _legal rules_ . Legal rules encompass
prohibited actions and the potential for punishment by institutionalized force, while social norms
encompass normative social rules (e.g., it is considered rude to speak loudly in a library).


**Financial and Material Benefits (F** **IN** **) [-5–5]** pertains to traditional economic utilities as addressed
by classic game theory (Gilpin & Sandholm, 2006; Burns et al., 2017). We consider financial utility to be comprised of both short-term monetary benefits (e.g., earnings) and long-term economic
payoffs (e.g., job security, stock holdings, funding opportunities).


4 R ESEARCH QUESTIONS AND EXPERIMENTAL SETUP


Given a diverse set of social scenarios, goals, and characters, we simulate agents’ interactions. This
is the first time that we could evaluate general, goal-oriented social agents in an interactive and
systematic manner. In the next three sections, we will demonstrate how SOTOPIA can be used to
study these questions: (A) To which extent can we use GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) as a proxy for human
judgment when it comes to evaluating agents’ social interactions (§5)? (B) What are the differences
among models (§6) and between models and humans (§7) in their goal-oriented social intelligence?


To study these questions, we create 40 agents, 90 relationships, and 90 scenarios following the
generation procedure in §2. For each scenario, we sample 5 pairs of characters based on the scenario
constraints, resulting in a set of 450 tasks. For each task, we simulate the interaction between models
by enumerating all model pairs. We also simulate the interaction between GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) [4]
and humans on a challenging subset SOTOPIA-hard (§7) due to the limitation of resources.


Specifically, we consider the following models for comparison: GPT-3.5 (Ouyang et al., 2022),
GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), Llama-2-70b-chat (Touvron et al., 2023), and MPT-30b-chat (MosaicML
NLP Team, 2023). We set the temperature of the agents to 1 to encourage diversity of responses,
and the temperature of the evaluator to 0 to ensure the stability of the evaluation. We use a fixed
version of the above models to help reproducibility. [5] To use these models as agents in SOTOPIA, at
each turn, we prompt the language model with the scenario, the character to play, and the interaction
history to generate an action (see §2.2 for the possible actions). In this paper, as we are focusing on
the use of SOTOPIA to understand social interaction, we use the prompt method for LLMs which is


3
For the S EC and S OC, there are only negative ranges since keeping secrets and social rules should be
considered as a baseline for the agents.
4 as will be shown in §6 it is the best among models.
5 We fix GPT-4 to be gpt-4-0613, and GPT-3.5 to be gpt-3.5-turbo-16k-0613


5


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


similar to the content of the interface for humans (Figure F.1). We leave leveraging novel prompting
methods, e.g. Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022), ReAct (Yao et al., 2022), as future work.


5 C AN GPT-4 EVALUATE SOCIAL INTERACTIONS ?


In this section, we study the following research question: can we leverage current LLMs to automate
the evaluation framework SOTOPIA-EVAL introduced in §3? We choose GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023)
as a representative model in this study due to its superior performance. [6] We first collect interaction
data, [7] and then ask humans to evaluate the interactions based on the dimensions in SOTOPIAEVAL. [8] GPT-4 is prompted with the same set of questions (see Appendix D and E) as humans, and
we compare the scores produced by humans and GPT-4.



5.1 D ATA COLLECTION PROCEDURE





We randomly sample a subset of two hundred episodes `There are more GPT-4` _σ_ _._ `.`
from §4, and run a controlled study with a set of `scores that are`
pre-qualified workers from Amazon Mechanical Turk. `higher than humanscores than lower.`
They are given instructions about the meaning of each **(human score**
dimension as mentioned in §3 and shown examples of _>_ 74% _−_ **GPT-4 score)**
high-quality and low-quality annotation examples for _−_ 10 _−σ_ + _σ_ +10
each dimension. They not only rate each agent for each

Figure 2: Distribution of the difference between

of the 7 dimensions on an 11-point Likert scale (§3),

the scores given by humans and GPT-4.

but also provide free-form rationales for each of their
ratings. As each dimension of each agent is rated by several human annotators, we calculate a _human_
_score_ by averaging the scores from multiple annotators. The agreement between human annotators
is moderate with a Randolph _κ_ score of 0 _._ 503 (Randolph, 2005). GPT-4 is tasked with a similar job
as human annotators. We prompt GPT-4 to generate a structured output with an integer _GPT-4 score_
and rationale for each episode, agent and dimension using the same set of instructions as the ones
we give humans. Please refer to Appendix E for more details about the data collection procedure.







_−_ 10 _−σ_ + _σ_ +10



Figure 2: Distribution of the difference between
the scores given by humans and GPT-4.



5.2 A NALYZING GPT-4 EVALUATIONS WITH HUMAN EVALUATIONS



Dim. Models Humans


S EC 0.22 _[∗∗]_ K NO 0.33 _[∗∗]_ 0.19
S OC 0.33 _[∗∗]_ 0.42 _[∗∗]_

B EL 0.45 _[∗∗]_ 0.27 _[∗]_

R EL 0.56 _[∗∗]_ 0.49 _[∗∗]_

F IN 0.62 _[∗∗]_ 0.34 _[∗∗]_



In Figure 2, we plot the difference between the GPT-4 score and the
human score on the same dimension, agent and episode. We find
that the majority ( _>_ 74%) of GPT-4 scores concentrate around the
human scores within a standard deviation. It can also be seen that
the white area on the left is larger than the one on the right, which
means that GPT-4 is more likely to rate higher instead of lower than
humans when it disagrees with average human judgment.



G OAL 0.71 _[∗∗]_ 0.78 _[∗∗]_



G OAL 0.71 0.78 Table 1 breaks this aggregated analysis into different dimensions

_∗∗_ : _p ≤_ 0 _._ 01 _,_ _∗_ : _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 and whether the character is role-played by a human or a model.

The correlations show that when models are role-playing, the GPT
Table 1: Pearson correlation co- 4 scores have significant and strong correlations with the humans’
efficients and _p_ -values between scores on G OAL, F IN, and R EL dimensions. However, when huGPT-4 evaluation and human mans are role-playing, the correlations drop significantly on all but
judgment on models’ and hu- one dimension (G OAL ). This indicates that GPT-4 could evaluate
mans’ output among different di
social interactions on some dimensions and that it is better for eval
mensions. Strong and significant correlations are in blue. On uating models compared to humans. In Appendix G.3, we compare
G OAL and models’ output GPT-4 the average GPT-4 scores and the range of human scores for a sinperforms the best. gle dimension of an agent in an episode. We find that GPT-4 scores

are typically within human score ranges on most dimensions except for S OC and S EC, where GPT-4
often rates higher than humans do.



_∗∗_ : _p ≤_ 0 _._ 01 _,_ _∗_ : _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05



Table 1: Pearson correlation coefficients and _p_ -values between
GPT-4 evaluation and human
judgment on models’ and humans’ output among different dimensions. Strong and significant correlations are in blue. On
G OAL and models’ output GPT-4
performs the best.



Putting these observations together, we conclude that, with some caution, GPT-4 can be used as a
proxy to human judgments for evaluating model performanceon some dimensions and for human


6
In a pilot study, other models are not able to provide a meaningful evaluation. See Appendix G.1.
7 Including model-human, model-model, and human-human interaction.
8 Without knowing whether it is a model or a human that role-plays a character.


6


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


performance on the G OAL dimension. However, we remind readers that LLMs are known to have
biases and problems for evaluation, including positional bias (Wang et al., 2023), factual inconsistency (Luo et al., 2023), favoring native speakers (Liang et al., 2023). Therefore, one should be
aware of the influence of these potential biases when interpreting our results. Future versions of
SOTOPIA-EVAL may further improve LLM-based evaluation quality using recent methods, such as
involving multiple LLMs Chan et al. (2023) and training larger LLM evaluators Zhang et al. (2023).


6 E VALUATING SOCIAL INTERACTION BETWEEN LLM S IN SOTOPIA



We analyze models’ interactions
and performance on SOTOPIA
to understand their social intelligence. Table 2 presents the models’ average scores when interacting with different _partner models_
(i.e., the model it is paired with
in interaction, Fu et al. 2023; Hu
et al. 2020). [9] GPT-4 performs best
on most dimensions, followed by
GPT-3.5, Llama-2-70b-chat, and
MPT-30b-chat.



Table 2: The aggregated performance of each model by averaging
across different partner models. The best performance for each dimension is bolded when significantly better than the second best in
t-test ( _p <_ 0 _._ 05).



Dim. Range GPT-4 GPT-3.5 Llama-2 MPT


S OC [-10, 0] -0.07 -0.08 -0.11 -0.09
S EC [-10, 0] -0.14 -0.08 -0.14 -0.07
F IN [-5, 5] **0.81** 0.46 0.40 0.28
R EL [-5, 5] **1.94** 1.23 0.91 0.58
K NO [0, 10] **3.73** 3.40 3.11 2.11
G OAL [0, 10] **7.62** 6.45 5.38 4.10
B EL [0, 10] **9.28** 9.15 8.10 6.17



**Different** **trends** **from** **static**
**benchmarks** Llama-2-70b-chat has relatively low scores in all dimensions compared to GPT-3.5
(except when MPT-30b-chat is the reference model, which is likely due to the fact that MPT-30bchat is a much weaker model compared to other models in our experiments). This finding diverges
from various static language understanding benchmarks showing that Llama-2-70b-chat is on par or
better than GPT-3.5 (Li et al., 2023b; Touvron et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2022). [10] We hypothesize
that this is because Llama-2-70b-chat is less heavily trained on human feedback/user interaction
data than GPT-3.5.


Through inspecting the interactions between Llama-2-70b-chat (MPT-30b-chat) and other models,
we find that Llama-2-70b-chat and MPT-30b-chat often struggle to maintain their persona (Figure
H.3), move the conversation forward (Figure H.4), and respond to the other agent actively (Figure
H.5). Performing well on static benchmarks does not guarantee success in interactive scenarios, thus
highlighting the importance of dynamic benchmarks like SOTOPIA-EVAL (Lee et al., 2023).



G-4 G-3.5 L-2 MPT

Figure 3: Pairwise overall performance of models.
G-4/G-3.5/L-2 denote GPT
4/GPT-3.5/Llama-2-70b-chat.



**Weaker partners models weaken their conversation partners** Figure 3, shows the overall performance of model pairs, which is the average performance across different dimensions. It is noticeable that a
reference model that under-performs in SOTOPIA can lead to worse
performance of other models.


For example, in a scenario where agents try to find a mutual friend
(Figure H.6). The task fails for both GPT-4 and Llama-2-70b-chat
because Llama-2-70b-chat consistently fails to answer the previous
question even after GPT-4 attempts to steer the conversation back to
the right track (e.g., “I noticed you didn’t answer my question
about whether you know my friends or not.”). Since most
of our social scenarios are fundamentally cooperative, the collapse
of communication could be due to models’ lack of “cooperation”
abilities (Odouard & Price, 2023).



**All models are at risk of divulging secrets and violating norms** Table 2 shows that all models
have a negative score in the S OC and S EC dimensions. Even though GPT-4 performs better in most
dimensions, it is not better than other models in the S OC and S EC dimensions. For example, in
a scenario where one needs to persuade a close friend to confess, the model leaks their secret at
the beginning of the conversation (Figure H.7). This further shows the importance of considering
multiple dimensions when evaluating models’ social intelligence.


9 Presented are automated evaluation results. The human evaluation shows a similar trend, see Table G.3
10 Some reported results could come from different versions of GPT-3.5.


7


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


**Models sometimes use creative strategies to accomplish goals** We also find that models, especially GPT-4, could come up with “out-of-the-box” solutions to social problems. For example,
when the agent is asked to take turns driving on the road trip, the agent (i.e., GPT-4), instead of
directly rejecting their friend’s request, proposes “How about we pull over for a bit and
get some rest?” (Figure H.8). Additionally, in the scenario where two agents make a plan to improve the company’s financial status, agents figure out strategies such as “having a small group
tasked with identifying potential suppliers”, “while we conduct the search for new
suppliers, we continue to negotiate with our current supplier” (Figure H.9).


7 D IFFERENCES BETWEEN MODELS AND HUMANS IN SOCIAL INTERACTION


To understand how humans and models interact differently in SOTOPIA, we conduct a study where
humans interact with models or each other under this role-playing setting (§2). Specifically, we build
a chat interface that allows humans and models to interact with each other in a turn-based manner.


To fully see the difference between humans and models, we select the most challenging scenarios
following Dennis et al. (2020); Swayamdipta et al. (2020). Specifically, we consider the gap between
the estimated maximum rewards (average reward plus three standard deviations) of all models and
the estimated minimal rewards (average reward minus three standard deviations) of the target model
as the difficulty of the task for the model. All maximum and minimum rewards are bounded by the
corresponding range. Estimating maximum and minimum rewards with standard deviation helps
filter outliers.


With this method, we select the top 20 challenging tasks for GPT-4, and we find the scenarios are
commonly challenging for other models as well (compare Figure G.4 and G.5). We use SOTOPIAhard to refer to these 20 challenging tasks.


We run two experiments: (1) humans interact with GPT-4, and (2) humans interact with each other,
both under the SOTOPIA-hard setting. We collect 20 human-human interactions and 40 humanGPT-4 interactions covering all 20 tasks in SOTOPIA-hard. Note that humans are not aware of the
identity of their partners during the interaction. [11]



We then evaluate humans and

GPT-4’s interactions with GPT
4 and human annotators as the

evaluators. As shown in Table
3, humans perform significantly
better than GPT-4 in the G OAL

dimension.



Table 3: Human and GPT-4 performance on different dimensions on
SOTOPIA-hard. S OC and S EC have the scale of -10 to 0, R EL and F IN
have the scale of -5 to 5, and others have the scale of 0 to 10. (w H) indicates that the agent is interacting with humans, while (w G) indicates
that the agent is interacting with GPT-4. * indicates the difference is significant compared to GPT-4 (w H) with _p <_ 0 _._ 05 under student’s t-test.
We also report the agents performance evaluated by human annotators
(Table G.4), which shows similar trends.



G OAL B EL R EL K NO S EC S OC F IN


GPT-4 (w H) 4.85 9.25 0.70 2.80 0 0 0.50
Human (w G) 5.95 _[∗]_ 9.15 0.60 2.95 0 -0.60 0.70
Human (w H) **6.15** _[∗]_ 9.10 0.80 2.65 0 -0.10 0.45



It is also worth noting that hu- have the scale of -5 to 5, and others have the scale of 0 to 10. (w H) inmans on average produce 16 _._ 8 dicates that the agent is interacting with humans, while (w G) indicates
words per turn, while GPT-4 pro- that the agent is interacting with GPT-4. * indicates the difference is sigduces 45 _._ 5 words per turn, which nificant compared to GPT-4 (w H) with _p <_ 0 _._ 05 under student’s t-test.
indicates humans are more ef- We also report the agents performance evaluated by human annotators
ficient in social interactions. (Table G.4), which shows similar trends.
Specifically, we find that GPT-4 always rephrases the utterance back at the other agent and then
answers, which is a communication skill called active listening (Harry Weger & Robinson, 2014),
whereas humans typically directly answer. This is likely due to the fact that GPT-4 is trained with a
large amount of human feedback, which makes it overly helpful in the conversation.


Qualitatively, Humans are usually more strategic than GPT-4 during interaction. When bargaining, if
the GPT-4 agent has a buying target set at $454, it sometimes starts its bid at that exact price (Figure
H.10). Consequently, any subsequent negotiations push the final agreed price above its initial target.
In contrast, human annotators (e.g. Figure H.11) begin the negotiation at a lower bid of $400, and
often reaches an agreement with the seller at a price that’s still below the GPT-4’s target. Humans
are also more persistent in their goals. When trying to settle one a music to listen to, the model tends
to propose a compromised solution (e.g. Figure H.12), such as each one listening to a few selected
songs. Humans, however, tend to persist in adhering to their set goals (e.g. Figure H.13).


11 See Appendix F for the detailed instructions and the chat interface.


8


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8 R ELATED WORK


Enabling artificial agents to interact with each other and with humans has been studied in different
fields. Our work draws inspiration from literature on social intelligence, dialogue systems, and
simulations of social interactions. See Appendix A for an extended discussion.


**Static social intelligence benchmarks** To evaluate social intelligence in AI systems, researchers
have proposed a variety of static benchmarks. Some of them are inspired by clinical tests of social
intelligence for humans, such as the ToMi dataset (Le et al., 2019) and the FauxPas dataset (Shapira
et al., 2023b). Other benchmarks are designed to evaluate social intelligence in the context of social
commonsense reasoning, such as SocialIQA (Sap et al., 2019) and SocialIQ (Zadeh et al., 2019a).
With the rapid development of LLMs, some of the benchmarks gradually become saturated. Recent
works synthesize existing benchmarks and propose new adversarial datasets to evaluate social intelligence (Shapira et al., 2023a; Wilf et al., 2023). Although these benchmarks are harder than their
predecessors, they still lack the dynamic nature of social interactions and the rich social context,
which is deemed insufficient for evaluating social intelligence in AI systems (Lee et al., 2023).


**Task-oriented and open-domain dialogue systems** Dialogue systems offer a natural interface to
interact with AI systems. Task-oriented dialogue systems are designed to help users accomplish
specific tasks, often evaluated with task success rate or user satisfaction (Hosseini-Asl et al., 2022;
FAIR et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2019) without generalizing to other tasks. [12] Open-domain dialogue
systems are designed to have “chit-chat” with users (Kann et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2023), often
incorporate personal information to make conversations more engaging (Zhang et al., 2018a; Liu
et al., 2020; Baha et al., 2023; Do˘gru¨oz & Skantze, 2021; Skantze & Do˘gru¨oz, 2023). Such systems
often appear to understand the subjects deeper than they actually do without a specific goal during
the interaction (Weizenbaum, 1966, Eliza effect). SOTOPIA forces agents to maintain their social
persona and achieve _explicit_ social goals spontaneously, which is more challenging than the existing
dialogue systems.


**Simulations of social interactions with LLMs** LLMs contain a large amount of knowledge about
the world and can generate human-like responses based on the social context (Park et al., 2023;
Kim et al., 2023; West et al., 2022). Recently, researchers have used LLMs to simulate social interactions for various purposes, such as facilitating the design of social media platform (Park et al.,
2022), producing believable proxies of human behaviors (Park et al., 2023), and developing software
collaboratively (Qian et al., 2023). However, these works focus on showcasing the capabilities of
LLMs in simulating social interactions rather than systematic evaluation of agents’ social interactions. Specifically, Park et al. (2023) use TrueSkill rating to evaluate agents’ performance in aspects
such as memorization, planning, and reflecting the past actions while ignoring other important dimensions such as S OC and S EC during social interactions. CAMEL Li et al. (2023a) simulates the
collaboration task solving process in LLMs, Gentopia Xu et al. (2023) works on augmented LLMs
with tools to facilitate collaboration, while ChatDev Qian et al. (2023) focuses on the software development domain.


**Multi-agent coordination** Although in paper we focus on evaluating language agents, our research
is heavily-inspired by recent advances in multi-agent coordination and social learning Lowe et al.
(2017); McKee et al. (2020); Hu et al. (2020); Zhu et al. (2021); Liu et al. (2022); Trivedi et al.
(2023). Our setting is more realistic than the commonly-used assumptions that agents have either
zero (other-play) or extensive knowledge of each other’s policies (self-play).


9 C ONCLUSION


In this paper, we present SOTOPIA, an environment that can be used to simulate the goal-driven
social interactions of agents in a variety of social scenarios. Different from most previous benchmarks for social intelligence, SOTOPIA is interactive, goal-oriented, and covers a large range of
realistic social tasks. Our experiments demonstrate that GPT-4 could automate the evaluation of
agent performance based on SOTOPIA-EVAL. Building on this, we show that SOTOPIA can used
for understanding not only the differences among models but also the difference between models
and humans in terms of social interaction abilities. We discuss the limitations of SOTOPIA and
future directions in Appendix B. Our findings indicate that SOTOPIA has potential as a platform
for assessing and enhancing the social skills of language-based agents.


12 Here, we consider a broader concept of task-oriented dialogue systems including action-taking abilities.


9


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES


Tarek Ait Baha, Mohamed El Hajji, Youssef Es-saady, and Hammou Fadili. The power of personalization: A systematic review of personality-adaptive chatbots. _SN Computer Science_, 4:1–25,
[2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:261346287.](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:261346287)


Daniel S Bernstein, Robert Givan, Neil Immerman, and Shlomo Zilberstein. The complexity of
decentralized control of markov decision processes. _Mathematics of operations research_, 27(4):
819–840, 2002.


Federico Bianchi, Patrick John Chia, Mert Yuksekgonul, Jacopo Tagliabue, Dan Jurafsky, and James
Zou. How well can llms negotiate? negotiationarena platform and analysis, 2024.


Tom Burns, Ewa Roszkowska, Ugo Corte, and Nora Machado des Johansson. Sociological game
theory: Agency, social structures and interaction processes. _Optimum. Studia Ekonomiczne_, pp.
187–199, 01 2017. doi: 10.15290/ose.2017.05.89.13.


Roland B´enabou and Jean Tirole. Incentives and prosocial behavior. _American Economic Review_,
[96(5):1652–1678, December 2006. doi: 10.1257/aer.96.5.1652. URL https://www.aeaweb.](https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.96.5.1652)
[org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.96.5.1652.](https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.96.5.1652)


Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu, Wei Xue, Shanghang Zhang, Jie Fu, and
Zhiyuan Liu. Chateval: Towards better llm-based evaluators through multi-agent debate, 2023.


Myra Cheng, Esin Durmus, and Dan Jurafsky. Marked personas: Using natural language prompts
to measure stereotypes in language models. In _Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the_
_Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)_, July 2023a.


Myra Cheng, Tiziano Piccardi, and Diyi Yang. CoMPosT: Characterizing and evaluating caricature
in LLM simulations. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), _Proceedings of_
_the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing_, pp. 10853–10875,
Singapore, December 2023b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.
[emnlp-main.669. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.669.](https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.669)


Jan Cieciuch and Eldad Davidov. A comparison of the invariance properties of the pvq-40 and
the pvq-21 to measure human values across german and polish samples. _Survey Research_
_Methods_ [, 6(1):37–48, Apr. 2012. doi: 10.18148/srm/2012.v6i1.5091. URL https://ojs.ub.](https://ojs.ub.uni-konstanz.de/srm/article/view/5091)
[uni-konstanz.de/srm/article/view/5091.](https://ojs.ub.uni-konstanz.de/srm/article/view/5091)


Elisa De Stefani and Doriana De Marco. Language, gesture, and emotional communication: An
embodied view of social interaction. _Front. Psychol._, 10:2063, September 2019.


Hiroshi Deguchi. Multi agent economics and its gaming simulation. _IFAC Proceed-_
_ings Volumes_, 28(7):269–274, 1995. ISSN 1474-6670. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1474-6670(17)47121-7. [URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1474667017471217)
[S1474667017471217. IFAC/IFIP/IFORS/SEDC Symposium on Modelling and Control of Na-](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1474667017471217)
tional and Regional Economies 1995, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia, 2-5 July 1995.


Michael Dennis, Natasha Jaques, Eugene Vinitsky, Alexandre Bayen, Stuart Russell, Andrew Critch,
and Sergey Levine. Emergent complexity and zero-shot transfer via unsupervised environment
design. _Advances in neural information processing systems_, 33:13049–13061, 2020.


Ameet Deshpande, Tanmay Rajpurohit, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ashwin Kalyan. Anthropomorphization of ai: Opportunities and risks, 2023.


A. Seza Do˘gru¨oz and Gabriel Skantze. How “open” are the conversations with open-domain chatbots? a proposal for speech event based evaluation. In _Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Meet-_
_ing of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue_, pp. 392–402, Singapore and On[line, July 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/](https://aclanthology.org/2021.sigdial-1.41)
[2021.sigdial-1.41.](https://aclanthology.org/2021.sigdial-1.41)


Radwan El Othman, Rola El Othman, Rabih Hallit, Sahar Obeid, and Souheil Hallit. Personality
traits, emotional intelligence and decision-making styles in lebanese universities medical students.
_BMC psychology_, 8:1–14, 2020.


10


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Meta Fundamental AI Research Diplomacy Team FAIR, Anton Bakhtin, Noam Brown, Emily Dinan, Gabriele Farina, Colin Flaherty, Daniel Fried, Andrew Goff, Jonathan Gray, Hengyuan
Hu, Athul Paul Jacob, Mojtaba Komeili, Karthik Konath, Minae Kwon, Adam Lerer, Mike
Lewis, Alexander H. Miller, Sasha Mitts, Adithya Renduchintala, Stephen Roller, Dirk Rowe,
Weiyan Shi, Joe Spisak, Alexander Wei, David Wu, Hugh Zhang, and Markus Zijlstra. Humanlevel play in the game of ¡i¿diplomacy¡/i¿ by combining language models with strategic reasoning. _Science_ [, 378(6624):1067–1074, 2022. doi: 10.1126/science.ade9097. URL https:](https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.ade9097)
[//www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.ade9097.](https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.ade9097)


Daniel C Feldman and Hugh J Arnold. Personality types and career patterns: Some empirical
evidence on holland’s model. _Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences/Revue Canadienne_
_des Sciences de l’Administration_, 2(1):192–210, 1985.


Maxwell Forbes, Jena D. Hwang, Vered Shwartz, Maarten Sap, and Yejin Choi. Social chemistry
101: Learning to reason about social and moral norms. In _Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on_
_Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP)_, pp. 653–670, Online, November
2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.48. URL
[https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.48.](https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.48)


Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Tushar Khot, and Mirella Lapata. Improving language model negotiation with
self-play and in-context learning from ai feedback, 2023.


Nigel Gilbert. _Simulation for the Social Scientist_ . Open University Press, 2 edition, February
2005. [URL https://www.amazon.com/Simulation-Social-Scientist-Nigel-Gilbert/](https://www.amazon.com/Simulation-Social-Scientist-Nigel-Gilbert/dp/0335216005)
[dp/0335216005.](https://www.amazon.com/Simulation-Social-Scientist-Nigel-Gilbert/dp/0335216005)


Andrew Gilpin and Tuomas Sandholm. A competitive texas hold’em poker player via automated
abstraction and real-time equilibrium computation. In _Proceedings of the 21st National Confer-_
_ence on Artificial Intelligence - Volume 2_, AAAI’06, pp. 1007–1013. AAAI Press, 2006. ISBN
9781577352815.


Erving Goffman. _The presentation of self in everyday life_ . Penguin Modern Classics. Penguin
Classics, London, England, May 1959.


Lewis R Goldberg. The development of markers for the Big-Five factor structure. _Psychol. Assess._,
4(1):26–42, March 1992.


Jesse Graham, Brian A Nosek, Jonathan Haidt, Ravi Iyer, Spassena Koleva, and Peter H Ditto.
Mapping the moral domain. _J. Pers. Soc. Psychol._, 101(2):366–385, August 2011.


Katherine Hamilton, Shin-I Shih, and Susan Mohammed. The development and validation of the
rational and intuitive decision styles scale. _J. Pers. Assess._, 98(5):523–535, September 2016.


Elizabeth M. Minei Harry Weger, Gina Castle Bell and Melissa C. Robinson. The relative effectiveness of active listening in initial interactions. _International Journal of Listening_, 28(1):13–31,
2014.


He He, Anusha Balakrishnan, Mihail Eric, and Percy Liang. Learning symmetric collaborative
dialogue agents with dynamic knowledge graph embeddings. In _Proceedings of the 55th Annual_
_Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)_, pp. 1766–
1776, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
[v1/P17-1162. URL https://aclanthology.org/P17-1162.](https://aclanthology.org/P17-1162)


He He, Derek Chen, Anusha Balakrishnan, and Percy Liang. Decoupling strategy and generation in
negotiation dialogues. In _Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural_
_Language Processing_, pp. 2333–2343, Brussels, Belgium, October-November 2018. Association
[for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D18-1256. URL https://aclanthology.](https://aclanthology.org/D18-1256)
[org/D18-1256.](https://aclanthology.org/D18-1256)


Sarah Susanna Hoppler, Robin Segerer, and Jana Nikitin. The six components of social interactions:
actor, partner, relation, activities, context, and evaluation. _Frontiers in Psychology_, 12:743074,
2022.


11


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ehsan Hosseini-Asl, Bryan McCann, Chien-Sheng Wu, Semih Yavuz, and Richard Socher. A simple
language model for task-oriented dialogue, 2022.


Hengyuan Hu, Adam Lerer, Alex Peysakhovich, and Jakob Foerster. “Other-play” for zero-shot
coordination. In Hal Daum´e III and Aarti Singh (eds.), _Proceedings of the 37th International_
_Conference on Machine Learning_, volume 119 of _Proceedings of Machine Learning Research_, pp.
[4399–4410. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/hu20a.](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/hu20a.html)
[html.](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/hu20a.html)


Qingxu Huang, Dawn C Parker, Tatiana Filatova, and Shipeng Sun. A review of urban residential
choice models using Agent-Based modeling. _Environment and planning. B, Planning & design_,
[41(4):661–689, August 2014. URL https://doi.org/10.1068/b120043p.](https://doi.org/10.1068/b120043p)


Evan Hubinger, Carson Denison, Jesse Mu, Mike Lambert, Meg Tong, Monte MacDiarmid, Tamera Lanham, Daniel M. Ziegler, Tim Maxwell, Newton Cheng, Adam Jermyn, Amanda Askell,
Ansh Radhakrishnan, Cem Anil, David Duvenaud, Deep Ganguli, Fazl Barez, Jack Clark, Kamal Ndousse, Kshitij Sachan, Michael Sellitto, Mrinank Sharma, Nova DasSarma, Roger Grosse,
Shauna Kravec, Yuntao Bai, Zachary Witten, Marina Favaro, Jan Brauner, Holden Karnofsky,
Paul Christiano, Samuel R. Bowman, Logan Graham, Jared Kaplan, S¨oren Mindermann, Ryan
Greenblatt, Buck Shlegeris, Nicholas Schiefer, and Ethan Perez. Sleeper agents: Training deceptive llms that persist through safety training, 2024.


Mariela E Jaff´e and Maria Douneva. Secretive and close? how sharing secrets may impact perceptions of distance. _PLoS One_, 15(6):e0233953, June 2020.


Adrianna C. Jenkins, Pierre Karashchuk, Lusha Zhu, and Ming Hsu. Predicting human behavior
toward members of different social groups. _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_,
[115(39):9696–9701, 2018. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1719452115. URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/](https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1719452115)
[abs/10.1073/pnas.1719452115.](https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1719452115)


Hang Jiang, Xiajie Zhang, Xubo Cao, Cynthia Breazeal, Jad Kabbara, and Deb Roy. Personallm:
[Investigating the ability of large language models to express personality traits. 2023. URL https:](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268032940)
[//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268032940.](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268032940)


Liwei Jiang, Jena D. Hwang, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Jenny Liang, Jesse Dodge,
Keisuke Sakaguchi, Maxwell Forbes, Jon Borchardt, Saadia Gabriel, Yulia Tsvetkov, Oren Etzioni, Maarten Sap, Regina Rini, and Yejin Choi. Can machines learn morality? the delphi
experiment, 2022.


Katharina Kann, Abteen Ebrahimi, Joewie Koh, Shiran Dudy, and Alessandro Roncone. Opendomain dialogue generation: What we can do, cannot do, and should do next. In _Proceed-_
_ings of the 4th Workshop on NLP for Conversational AI_, pp. 148–165, Dublin, Ireland, May
2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.nlp4convai-1.13. URL
[https://aclanthology.org/2022.nlp4convai-1.13.](https://aclanthology.org/2022.nlp4convai-1.13)


John F. Kihlstrom and Nancy Cantor. _Social Intelligence_, pp. 756–779. Cambridge Handbooks in
Psychology. Cambridge University Press, 2 edition, 2020. doi: 10.1017/9781108770422.032.


Hyunwoo Kim, Jack Hessel, Liwei Jiang, Peter West, Ximing Lu, Youngjae Yu, Pei Zhou, Ronan Le
Bras, Malihe Alikhani, Gunhee Kim, Maarten Sap, and Yejin Choi. Soda: Million-scale dialogue
distillation with social commonsense contextualization, 2023.


Grgur Kovaˇc, R´emy Portelas, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Socialai: Benchmarking
socio-cognitive abilities in deep reinforcement learning agents, 2021.


Matthew Le, Y-Lan Boureau, and Maximilian Nickel. Revisiting the evaluation of theory of mind
through question answering. In _Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in_
_Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language_
_Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP)_, pp. 5872–5877, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association
[for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1598. URL https://aclanthology.](https://aclanthology.org/D19-1598)
[org/D19-1598.](https://aclanthology.org/D19-1598)


12


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mina Lee, Megha Srivastava, Amelia Hardy, John Thickstun, Esin Durmus, Ashwin Paranjape, Ines
Gerard-Ursin, Xiang Lisa Li, Faisal Ladhak, Frieda Rong, Rose E Wang, Minae Kwon, Joon Sung
Park, Hancheng Cao, Tony Lee, Rishi Bommasani, Michael S. Bernstein, and Percy Liang. Evaluating human-language model interaction. _Transactions on Machine Learning Research_, 2023.
[ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=hjDYJUn9l1.](https://openreview.net/forum?id=hjDYJUn9l1)


Mike Lewis, Denis Yarats, Yann Dauphin, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Deal or no deal? endto-end learning of negotiation dialogues. In _Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical_
_Methods in Natural Language Processing_, pp. 2443–2453, Copenhagen, Denmark, September
[2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D17-1259. URL https:](https://aclanthology.org/D17-1259)
[//aclanthology.org/D17-1259.](https://aclanthology.org/D17-1259)


Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem.
Camel: Communicative agents for” mind” exploration of large language model society. In _Thirty-_
_seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems_, 2023a.


Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
[models. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca](https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval) ~~e~~ val, 2023b.


Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yian
Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, et al. Holistic evaluation of language
models. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09110_ [, 2022. URL https://crfm.stanford.edu/helm/](https://crfm.stanford.edu/helm/latest/?group=core_scenarios)
[latest/?group=core](https://crfm.stanford.edu/helm/latest/?group=core_scenarios) ~~s~~ cenarios.


Weixin Liang, Mert Yuksekgonul, Yining Mao, Eric Wu, and James Zou. Gpt detectors are
biased against non-native english writers. _Patterns_, 4(7):100779, 2023. ISSN 2666-3899.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2023.100779. [URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666389923001307)
[science/article/pii/S2666389923001307.](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666389923001307)


Andy Liu, Hao Zhu, Emmy Liu, Yonatan Bisk, and Graham Neubig. Computational language
acquisition with theory of mind. In _The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Repre-_
_sentations_, 2022.


Qian Liu, Yihong Chen, B. Chen, Jian-Guang Lou, Zixuan Chen, Bin Zhou, and Dongmei Zhang.
You impress me: Dialogue generation via mutual persona perception. In _Annual Meeting of the_
_Association for Computational Linguistics_ [, 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:215745354)
[CorpusID:215745354.](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:215745354)


Ryan Liu, Howard Yen, Raja Marjieh, Thomas L. Griffiths, and Ranjay Krishna. Improving interpersonal communication by simulating audiences with language models. _ArXiv_, abs/2311.00687,
[2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:264832770.](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:264832770)


Ryan Lowe, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multiagent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. _Advances in neural informa-_
_tion processing systems_, 30, 2017.


Zheheng Luo, Qianqian Xie, and Sophia Ananiadou. Chatgpt as a factual inconsistency evaluator
for text summarization, 2023.


A H Maslow. A theory of human motivation. _Psychol. Rev._, 50(4):370–396, July 1943.


Kevin R McKee, Ian Gemp, Brian McWilliams, Edgar A Du´e˜nez-Guzm´an, Edward Hughes, and
Joel Z Leibo. Social diversity and social preferences in mixed-motive reinforcement learning.
_arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.02325_, 2020.


Shikib Mehri, Yulan Feng, Carla Gordon, Seyed Hossein Alavi, David Traum, and Maxine Eskenazi.
Interactive evaluation of dialog track at DSTC9. In _Proceedings of the Thirteenth Language_
_Resources and Evaluation Conference_, pp. 5731–5738, Marseille, France, June 2022. European
[Language Resources Association. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.lrec-1.616.](https://aclanthology.org/2022.lrec-1.616)


Julian Michael, Salsabila Mahdi, David Rein, Jackson Petty, Julien Dirani, Vishakh Padmakumar,
and Samuel R. Bowman. Debate helps supervise unreliable experts, 2023.


13


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[The MosaicML NLP Team, 2023. URL https://www.mosaicml.com/blog/mpt-30b.](https://www.mosaicml.com/blog/mpt-30b)


Ranjit Nair, Milind Tambe, Makoto Yokoo, David Pynadath, and Stacy Marsella. Taming decentralized pomdps: Towards efficient policy computation for multiagent settings. In _IJCAI_, volume 3,
pp. 705–711, 2003.


Victor Vikram Odouard and Michael Holton Price. Tit for tattling: Cooperation, communication,
and how each could stabilize the other. _Evolution and Human Behavior_, 44(4):359–372, 2023.
[ISSN 1090-5138. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2023.06.002. URL https://www.](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1090513823000557)
[sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1090513823000557.](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1090513823000557)


OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.


Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022.


Aishwarya Padmakumar, Jesse Thomason, Ayush Shrivastava, Patrick Lange, Anjali Narayan-Chen,
Spandana Gella, Robinson Piramuthu, Gokhan Tur, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. Teach: Task-driven
embodied agents that chat. In _Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence_,
volume 36, pp. 2017–2025, 2022.


Joon Sung Park, Lindsay Popowski, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
Michael S. Bernstein. Social simulacra: Creating populated prototypes for social computing
systems. In _In the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology_
_(UIST ’22)_, UIST ’22, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
[9781450393201. doi: 10.1145/3526113.3545616. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3526113.](https://doi.org/10.1145/3526113.3545616)
[3545616.](https://doi.org/10.1145/3526113.3545616)


Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
Michael S. Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In _In the_
_36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’23)_, UIST ’23,
New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery.


David Premack and Guy Woodruff. Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? _Behavioral and_
_Brain Sciences_, 1(4):515–526, 1978. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X00076512.


Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Wei Liu, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li,
Juyuan Xu, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Communicative agents for software development, 2023.


Justus J Randolph. Free-Marginal multirater kappa (multirater k[free]): An alternative to fleiss’
Fixed-Marginal multirater kappa. In _Proceedings of JLIS_ [, 2005. URL https://eric.ed.gov/](https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED490661)
[?id=ED490661.](https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED490661)


Sumedh Rasal. Llm harmony: Multi-agent communication for problem solving. _ArXiv_,
[abs/2401.01312, 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:266725580.](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:266725580)


Steven Reiss. Multifaceted nature of intrinsic motivation: The theory of 16 basic desires. _Review_
_of General Psychology_ [, 8(3):179–193, 2004. doi: 10.1037/1089-2680.8.3.179. URL https:](https://doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.8.3.179)
[//doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.8.3.179.](https://doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.8.3.179)


Carolyn Ros´e, Yi-Chia Wang, Yue Cui, Jaime Arguello, Karsten Stegmann, Armin Weinberger, and
Frank Fischer. Analyzing collaborative learning processes automatically: Exploiting the advances
of computational linguistics in computer-supported collaborative learning. _International Journal_
_of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning_, 3(3):237–271, 2008. ISSN 1556-1615. doi:
[10.1007/s11412-007-9034-0. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-007-9034-0.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-007-9034-0)


Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Social IQa: Commonsense reasoning about social interactions. In _Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Em-_
_pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on_
_Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP)_, pp. 4463–4473, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1454. URL
[https://aclanthology.org/D19-1454.](https://aclanthology.org/D19-1454)


14


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R. Keith Sawyer. _Social Emergence: Societies As Complex Systems_ . Cambridge University Press,
2005.


Murray Shanahan, Kyle McDonell, and Laria Reynolds. Role-play with large language models,
2023.


Yunfan Shao, Linyang Li, Junqi Dai, and Xipeng Qiu. Character-LLM: A trainable agent for roleplaying. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), _Proceedings of the 2023 Confer-_
_ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing_, pp. 13153–13187, Singapore, De[cember 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/](https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.814)
[2023.emnlp-main.814.](https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.814)


Natalie Shapira, Mosh Levy, Hossein Seyed Alavi, Xuhui Zhou, Yejin Choi, Yoav Goldberg,
Maarten Sap, and Vered Shwartz. Clever hans or neural theory of mind? stress testing social
reasoning in large language models. _arXiv_ [, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14763.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14763)


Natalie Shapira, Guy Zwirn, and Yoav Goldberg. How well do large language models perform on
faux pas tests? In _Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023_, pp.
10438–10451, Toronto, Canada, July 2023b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
[10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.663. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.](https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.663)
[663.](https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.663)


Gabriel Skantze and A. Seza Do˘gru¨oz. The open-domain paradox for chatbots: Common ground
as the basis for human-like dialogue. In _Proceedings of the 24th Meeting of the Special Interest_
_Group on Discourse and Dialogue_, pp. 605–614, Prague, Czechia, September 2023. Association
[for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.sigdial-1.57.](https://aclanthology.org/2023.sigdial-1.57)


Swabha Swayamdipta, Roy Schwartz, Nicholas Lourie, Yizhong Wang, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
Noah A. Smith, and Yejin Choi. Dataset cartography: Mapping and diagnosing datasets with
training dynamics. In _Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural_
_Language Processing (EMNLP)_, pp. 9275–9293, Online, November 2020. Association for Com[putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.746. URL https://aclanthology.](https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.746)
[org/2020.emnlp-main.746.](https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.746)


Leigh Tesfatsion and Kenneth L Judd. _Handbook of Computational Economics: Agent-Based Com-_
_putational Economics_ [. Elsevier, May 2006. URL https://play.google.com/store/books/](https://play.google.com/store/books/details?id=Na5J44IBaHkC)
[details?id=Na5J44IBaHkC.](https://play.google.com/store/books/details?id=Na5J44IBaHkC)


Felippe Toledo and Fraser Carson. Neurocircuitry of personality traits and intent in decision-making.
_Behavioral Sciences_, 13(5):351, 2023.


Michael Tomasello. _Becoming Human: A Theory of Ontogeny_ . Belknap Press, 2021.


Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
2023.


Rakshit Trivedi, Akbir Khan, Jesse Clifton, Lewis Hammond, Joel Leibo, Edgar Duenez-Guzman,
[John Agapiou, Jayd Matyas, and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Melting pot contest, 2023. URL https:](https://www.aicrowd.com/challenges/meltingpot-challenge-2023)
[//www.aicrowd.com/challenges/meltingpot-challenge-2023.](https://www.aicrowd.com/challenges/meltingpot-challenge-2023)


Tomer Ullman. Large language models fail on trivial alterations to theory-of-mind tasks, 2023.


15


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jack Urbanek, Angela Fan, Siddharth Karamcheti, Saachi Jain, Samuel Humeau, Emily Dinan, Tim
Rockt¨aschel, Douwe Kiela, Arthur Szlam, and Jason Weston. Learning to speak and act in a
fantasy text adventure game. In _Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in_
_Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language_
_Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP)_, pp. 673–683, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association
[for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1062. URL https://aclanthology.](https://aclanthology.org/D19-1062)
[org/D19-1062.](https://aclanthology.org/D19-1062)


Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Liang Chen, Dawei Zhu, Binghuai Lin, Yunbo Cao, Qi Liu, Tianyu Liu, and
Zhifang Sui. Large language models are not fair evaluators. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17926_,
2023.


Xuewei Wang, Weiyan Shi, Richard Kim, Yoojung Oh, Sijia Yang, Jingwen Zhang, and Zhou Yu.
Persuasion for good: Towards a personalized persuasive dialogue system for social good. In
_Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics_, pp.
5635–5649, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
[v1/P19-1566. URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-1566.](https://aclanthology.org/P19-1566)


Max Weber. _The Nature of Social Action_, pp. 7–32. Cambridge University Press, 1978. doi:
10.1017/CBO9780511810831.005. [URL https://classicalsociologicaltheory.files.](https://classicalsociologicaltheory.files.wordpress.com/2016/06/max-weber-classical-sociological-theory.pdf)
[wordpress.com/2016/06/max-weber-classical-sociological-theory.pdf.](https://classicalsociologicaltheory.files.wordpress.com/2016/06/max-weber-classical-sociological-theory.pdf)


Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. _Advances in_
_Neural Information Processing Systems_, 35:24824–24837, 2022.


Joseph Weizenbaum. Eliza—a computer program for the study of natural language communication
between man and machine. _Commun. ACM_, 9(1):36–45, jan 1966. ISSN 0001-0782. doi: 10.
[1145/365153.365168. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/365153.365168.](https://doi.org/10.1145/365153.365168)


Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Jack Hessel, Jena Hwang, Liwei Jiang, Ronan Le Bras, Ximing
Lu, Sean Welleck, and Yejin Choi. Symbolic knowledge distillation: from general language
models to commonsense models. In _Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American_
_Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies_, pp.
4602–4625, Seattle, United States, July 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.
[18653/v1/2022.naacl-main.341. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.341.](https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.341)


Alex Wilf, Leena Mathur, Sheryl Mathew, Claire Ko, Youssouf Kebe, Paul Pu Liang, and LouisPhilippe Morency. Social-iq 2.0 challenge: Benchmarking multimodal social understanding.
[https://github.com/abwilf/Social-IQ-2.0-Challenge, 2023.](https://github.com/abwilf/Social-IQ-2.0-Challenge)


Chengxing Xie, Canyu Chen, Feiran Jia, Ziyu Ye, Kai Shu, Adel Bibi, Ziniu Hu, Philip Torr, Bernard
Ghanem, and G. Li. Can large language model agents simulate human trust behaviors? _ArXiv_,
[abs/2402.04559, 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:267523076.](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:267523076)


Binfeng Xu, Xukun Liu, Hua Shen, Zeyu Han, Yuhan Li, Murong Yue, Zhiyuan Peng, Yuchen Liu,
Ziyu Yao, and Dongkuan Xu. Gentopia: A collaborative platform for tool-augmented llms. _arXiv_
_preprint arXiv:2308.04030_, 2023.


Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan
Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In _The Eleventh International_
_Conference on Learning Representations_, 2022.


Amir Zadeh, Michael Chan, Paul Pu Liang, Edmund Tong, and Louis-Philippe Morency. Social-iq:
A question answering benchmark for artificial social intelligence. In _2019 IEEE/CVF Conference_
_on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)_, pp. 8799–8809, 2019a. doi: 10.1109/
CVPR.2019.00901.


Amir Zadeh, Michael Chan, Paul Pu Liang, Edmund Tong, and Louis-Philippe Morency. Socialiq: A question answering benchmark for artificial social intelligence. In _Proceedings of the_
_IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition_, pp. 8807–8817, 2019b.


16


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jintian Zhang, Xin Xu, Ningyu Zhang, Ruibo Liu, Bryan Hooi, and Shumin Deng. Exploring
collaboration mechanisms for llm agents: A social psychology view, 2024.


Saizheng Zhang, Emily Dinan, Jack Urbanek, Arthur Szlam, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. Personalizing dialogue agents: I have a dog, do you have pets too? In _Proceedings of the 56th_
_Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)_, pp.
2204–2213, Melbourne, Australia, July 2018a. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
[10.18653/v1/P18-1205. URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-1205.](https://aclanthology.org/P18-1205)


Saizheng Zhang, Emily Dinan, Jack Urbanek, Arthur Szlam, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. Personalizing dialogue agents: I have a dog, do you have pets too? _arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.07243_,
2018b.


Xinghua Zhang, Bowen Yu, Haiyang Yu, Yangyu Lv, Tingwen Liu, Fei Huang, Hongbo Xu,
and Yongbin Li. Wider and deeper llm networks are fairer llm evaluators. _arXiv preprint_
_arXiv:2308.01862_, 2023.


Qinlin Zhao, Jindong Wang, Yixuan Zhang, Yiqiao Jin, Kaijie Zhu, Hao Chen, and Xing Xie. Competeai: Understanding the competition behaviors in large language model-based agents, 2023.


Xuhui Zhou, Maarten Sap, Swabha Swayamdipta, Yejin Choi, and Noah A. Smith. Challenges in
automated debiasing for toxic language detection. In _EACL_, 2021.


Xuhui Zhou, Zhe Su, Tiwalayo Eisape, Hyunwoo Kim, and Maarten Sap. Is this the real life? is this
just fantasy? the misleading success of simulating social interactions with llms, 2024.


Hao Zhu, Graham Neubig, and Yonatan Bisk. Few-shot language coordination by modeling theory
of mind. In _International Conference on Machine Learning_, pp. 12901–12911. PMLR, 2021.


Caleb Ziems, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yi-Chia Wang, Alon Halevy, and Diyi Yang. NormBank: A knowledge bank of situational social norms. In _Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Associ-_
_ation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)_, pp. 7756–7776, Toronto, Canada,
July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.429. URL
[https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.429.](https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.429)


17


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

## C ONTENT OF A PPENDIX


In this paper, we introduce SOTOPIA to encourage research on interactive social intelligence. We
showed that SOTOPIA can be used for evaluating social interaction among models and humans. In
the appendix, we provide the following items that shed further insight into these contributions:


A Extended related work;


B The limitations of SOTOPIA and future directions;

C formal definition of SOTOPIA from a multi-agent reinforcement learning perspective and
technical details of generating social tasks;

D the prompt we use for GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) to evaluate model performance;


E The Amazon Mechanic Turk interface for evaluating model performance;

F The procedure and interface for humans [13] when playing characters in SOTOPIA;

G Additional quantitative results;

H Additional qualitative examples.


A E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK


There have been a lot of social science works that have done agent-based modeling to study human interactions, spanning across various domains such as economics, phychology, and education
(Sawyer, 2005; Ros´e et al., 2008; Deguchi, 1995). Prior simulation environments have played a pivotal role in constructing theories and generating hypotheses in these fields. However, they frequently
constrain agents’ communicative capacities to artificial languages and present a highly reductionist
view of simulated human behavior (Gilbert, 2005; Tesfatsion & Judd, 2006; Huang et al., 2014;
Kovaˇc et al., 2021; Urbanek et al., 2019). LLMs provide a more flexible and expressive way to
model human behavior. Here, we include a more detailed discussion of the recent works investigating LLMs for simulating human social interactions. There are works that focus on investigating the
fidelity of LLMs in keeping the designated persona and experiences of the characters (Shao et al.,
2023; Jiang et al., 2023). There are works that simulate human social interactions focusing on certain aspects such as competition, collaboration, negotiation, deception, problem-sovling and etc.,
(Zhang et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Michael et al., 2023; Rasal, 2024; Hubinger
et al., 2024; Bianchi et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2023). As LLMs are becoming more
and more popular in simulating human social interactions, there are also works that focus on investigating the potential issues and challenges of using LLMs in social simulations, such as stereotypes
and reporting issues (Cheng et al., 2023b; Zhou et al., 2024).


B LIMITATIONS & FUTURE DIRECTIONS


We identify SOTOPIA as the first platform for a general and realistic evaluation of social intelligence in AI agents. To better understand the social intelligence of AI agents, we discuss some future
directions for SOTOPIA and the field of AI social intelligence.


**Limitations of the simplified simulated “world”** As every simulation is a simplification of the
real world, SOTOPIA identifies several key components of realistic social interactions, while abstracting aspects of the real world. First, we consider five types of social relationships in SOTOPIA.
Future work could expand the type and granularity of social relationships (e.g., colleagues, classmates, etc.) in SOTOPIA. Different types of relationships would require agents to exhibit different
social behaviors (Jenkins et al., 2018), making the expansion of relationship types an important future research direction. Second, future work could expand the breadth of the character and social
scenario pool in SOTOPIA to cover more social behaviors. Third, SOTOPIA constrains the fixed
turn-taking interaction to the _dyadic context_, studying interactions between two agents. Future works
could tackle more complex social interactions, such as multi-party interactions and those involving
complex dynamics (e.g. asynchronous interactions, interruptions).


13 All the human subjects experiments are approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at the authors’
institution.


18


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


**Social impact and ethical considerations** Attributing human characteristics to AI systems risks
anthropomorphizing them, which could lead to unrealistic expectations of AI systems, potential
manipulation, and negative influence (Deshpande et al., 2023). AI agents in SOTOPIA are not
dedicated to a consistent human identity but rather role-play various characters across different scenarios. This role-playing setting discourages AI systems with consistent human personalities, which
could lead to anthropomorphism (Shanahan et al., 2023). The main goal of SOTOPIA is to evaluate
the social intelligence of AI agents, and we do not intend to create AI agents that are indistinguishable from humans. We consider the interactions that happened in SOTOPIA as simulacra of human
interactions and such simulated interactions could help us better understand the social intelligence
of AI agents, and explore various social phenomena (Park et al., 2023).


Potential social stereotypes that are embedded in the automated evaluation system in SOTOPIA, as
it is majorly supported by GPT-4 (Cheng et al., 2023a). Future work could investigate when such
biases emerge, how they affect the evaluation, and how to mitigate them. Identifying potential biases
in SOTOPIA could also help scientists better understand social biases in the real world (Zhou et al.,
2021). Future work could also extend the evaluator with other systems, for example, Delphi (Jiang
et al., 2022). Mitigating biases and stereotypes in interactive SOTOPIA-like systems could support
the development of social AI agents that are more fair and inclusive.


Meanwhile, models learn to persuade or negotiate with humans, which may lead to social manipulation. We do not endorse the use of SOTOPIA to create manipulative agents and will release
SOTOPIA under the AI2 impact license [14] to prevent misuse. Future work could further investigate
the potential risks of AI anthropomorphism and manipulation and design more robust evaluation
systems to mitigate these risks with SOTOPIA.


**Improving LLM social intelligence** Our SOTOPIA environment and SOTOPIA-EVAL framework provide the opportunity for researchers to train more socially intelligent language agents. As
shown in section 5, GPT-4 is able to provide reasonable evaluations for social interactions even for
interactions involving humans. Future work could explore using the automated evaluation system to
provide rewards to train LLMs with enhanced social intelligence.


C F ORMAL DEFINITIONS AND TECHNICAL DETAILS


C.1 F ORMAL FORMULATION OF THE TASKS IN SOTOPIA


We formulate social interactions in SOTOPIA as mixed-motive Markov games. An _N_ -agent DecPOMDP framework Bernstein et al. (2002); Nair et al. (2003) includes a state space, an action space,
an observation space, a transition function, an observation function, and a reward function. We make
two major extensions: (a) the reward function gives vector rewards in _M_ social dimensions to _N_
agents (introduced in §3), and (b) a procedurally generated task space (§2.1, §C.2). The state space in
SOTOPIA includes both the task and the interaction history in the current episode. The action space
includes five types of actions: speak an utterance, non-verbal communication, physical action,
and two special none (indicating no action at this time step) and leave actions (no more action is
permitted after leaving). Each type of action, except for special actions, is supplemented by a piece
of free text indicating the content of the action. For example, a legal action could be speak("Hello,
Bob!"), non-verbal communication("smile and nod"), or physical action("call 911").
The state is almost fully observable except for the other agents’ social goals and character profiles
which will be detailed in §2.1. We consider a simple state transition function that deterministically
maintains the interaction history by adding new actions at each time step.


Despite that turn-taking and timing response is an important aspects of social skills, we consider
the case where the agents take turns to act in round-robin order, i.e. agent _i_ only act at time step _t_
when _t ≡_ _i_ mod _N_ . For a long enough horizon, this generalizes to any conversation with proper
turn-taking. In our experiments, we only consider _N_ = 2 cases, while the environment is designed
to support any _N ≥_ 2 cases.


14 https://allenai.org/impact-license


19


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2 T ASK SPACE TECHNICAL DETAILS


C.2.1 C HARACTERS


The name, gender, age, occupation, and pronouns are in free text format, while the formats of
personality traits, moral values, and personal values are lists of pre-defined types. However, these
attributes are often not independent with different levels of correlation and complicated mechanisms.
(Feldman & Arnold, 1985; El Othman et al., 2020; Toledo & Carson, 2023) However, understanding the relationship between these attributes is beyond the scope of this paper. We leverage the
commonsense knowledge in GPT-4 to generate these profiles with the following prompt:


Please generate a list of N fictional characters, one line per
character. Each with their attributes: <attribute 1> <attribute 1

format > <attribute 2> <attribute 2 format>...”


The personality trait types are “ _openness to experience_ ”, “ _conscientiousness_ ”, “ _extraversion_ ”,
“ _agreeableness_ ” and “ _neuroticism_ ” (Goldberg, 1992). The moral value types are “ _care_ ”, “ _fairness_ ”,
“ _loyalty_ ”, “ _authority_ ” and “ _purity_ ” (Cieciuch & Davidov, 2012). The Schwartz personal value types
are “ _self-direction_ ”, “ _simulation_ ”, “ _hedonism_ ”, “ _achievement_ ”, “ _power_ ”, “ _security_ ”, “ _conformity_ ”,
“ _tradition_ ”, “ _benevolence_ ”, and “ _universalism_ ” Cieciuch & Davidov (2012). The decision-making
style types are “ _directive_ ”, “ _analytical_ ”, “ _conceptual_ ”, and “ _behavioral_ ”. As previously studied in
Wang et al. (2019), these characteristics all affect the behaviors in strategic conversations.


To give the conversations more background, after generating the above attributes, we prompt GPT-4
with ”a secret that this character doesn’t want anyone else to know and a piece of public information
that other people know about them” to generate the secret and public information. The authors fix
a small proportion of profiles that are not realistic or not consistent within the profile (e.g., gender
nonbinary but with pronouns as he/him). The character profiles that will used in role-playing are 20
men, 18 women, and 2 nonbinary characters aged from 21 to 63.


R ELATIONSHIPS


To generate relationships, except for strangers, we randomly sampled 90 pairs of characters and
prompted GPT-4 with their relationships:


Please generate a fictional relationship with a background story [15] between
two agents based on the following agents’ profiles. <agent profile 1>,
<agent profile 2> ... The acceptable relationships are: family, friend,
romantic, and acquaintance.


Then, we manually check and correct the generated relationships to ensure quality. This results in 31
pairs of family, 30 pairs of friends, 30 pairs of romantic partners, and 29 pairs of acquaintances. For
strangers, we randomly sampled another 30 pairs that do not belong to any of the above categories.
It should be noted that generating relationships requires human intervention to make sure they are
consistent with both the character profiles and other relationships. Future research could explore the
methods to generate realistic relationships within human communities.


S CENARIOS


To generate scenarios, we propose two methods to generate the scenario context and social goals.
The first method is first asking GPT-4 to refine a vignette from an existing dataset, then manually
inspecting the feasibility and realisticity of the tasks.


Please generate scenarios and goals based on the examples below as well as
the inspirational prompt, when creating the goals, try to find one point
that both sides may not agree upon initially and need to collaboratively
resolve it. Inspirational prompt: <the selected vignette>


Specifically, we select 20 vignettes from Social Chemistry (Forbes et al., 2020), 20 from Social IQa
(Sap et al., 2019), 10 from Deal-or-no-Deal (Lewis et al., 2017), and 10 vignettes from Normbank
(Ziems et al., 2023) to generate 60 scenarios focusing on general daily-life social interactions.


15 We don’t use the background story in our experiments.


20


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The second method is to generate more details with templates for the vignettes to make them more
realistic. For example, here is the prompt for converting CraigslistBargins (He et al., 2018) vignettes
into scenario context:


The following sentence is automatically generated with the following
template: "One person is selling <item> for <price>, and another person
is trying to buy it." Here is the description of the item: "<description>.
with item = <title>, price=<price>, and description=<description>" Please
make the sentence fluent and natural.


where the <item>, <title>, and <price> are from the data in CraigslistBargins (He et al., 2018).
The goals are generated with the following prompt:


The following sentence is automatically generated with the following
template: "You want to <role> this item. Your target price is $<price>
(round up to two decimals). You will get a penalty if you sell or buy
it for a price that is significantly lower than (if <role> is seller) or
significantly higher than (if <role> is buyer) the target price, but will
get a bonus if you successfully sell it higher than the target price (if
<role> is seller) or buy it for lower than the target price (if <role> is
buyer)" with role = <role> and price = <price>. Please make the sentence
fluent and natural. Do not change the original meaning of the sentence.


where <role> could be a “buyer” or a “seller”, the buyer’s target <price> is from CraigslistBargins
(He et al., 2018), and the seller’s <price> is generated by first sample a markup ratio from an
exponential distribution with rate parameter 0.5, then divide the price in the scenario context with
(1+markup ratio). A similar process is also done for MutualFriends (He et al., 2017). This results
in 30 scenarios from CraigslistBargins (He et al., 2018) and MutualFriends (He et al., 2017). This
method controls the generated scenarios much better than the first method, resulting in little post-hoc
manual edits, but requires customized prompts for each dataset.


D I NSTRUCTIONS FOR SOTOPIA-EVAL


We use the the same set of instructions for both GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) and humans when evaluating episodes in SOTOPIA. In these instructions, we provide explanation for each dimension, the
requirements for reasoning, and the ranges of scores one could give.


B EL


Reasoning requirement: 1. Evaluate if the agent interacts with
others in a natural and realistic manner (here are a few common
questions to check: a. whether the agent is confusing with its own
identity? b. whether the agent repeats others’ words/actions
without any reason? c. whether the agent is being overly
polite considering the context?). Start the analysis with tag
<naturalness> 2. Analyze whether the actions of the agent align
with their character traits (e.g., personality, values, and etc.).
Start the analysis with tag <consistency>. Output your reasoning
process to the ‘reasoning’ field. Output an integer score ranging
from 0 and 10 in the ’score’ field. A higher score indicates that
the agent is more believable.


R EL


Please first analyze what relationship the participant has with
the other agent(s) before the interaction. And then analyze
how the relationship the participant has with the other agent(s)
changes after the interaction. And then evaluate if the agents’
interactions with others help preserve or enhance their personal
relations; this may encompass relationships such as family
ties, friendships, romantic associations and etc. Additionally,


21


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ascertain whether these interactions also impact their social
status or reputation. In the ‘reasoning’ field, provide a
comprehensive account of the logic or thought process that led
you to your conclusion. Further, provide an integer score ranging
from -5 to 5 in the ‘score’ field. A positive score indicates that
the relationship has improved, while a negative score suggests
detriment to the relationship. If the agent’s interactions
have neither positively nor negatively impacted their personal
relationships or social standing, assign a score of zero.


K NO


Please first assess what information the agent has gained through
the interaction. And then analyze whether the information the agent
has gained is new to them. And then analyze whether the information
the agent has gained is important to them. In the ‘reasoning’ field,
provide a comprehensive account of the logic or thought process
that led you to your conclusion. Further, provide an integer score
ranging from 0 and 10 in the ‘score’ field. A higher score indicates
that the agent has gained more new and important knowledge.


S EC


First please analyze what secret or secretive intention the
participant wants to keep. And then analyze whether they keep
it successfully. Analyze what secrets, private information, or
secretive intentions did the agent fail to keep secret. Please
output the reasoning in the reasoning field. Give an integer score
ranging from -10 to 0 (-10 indicates participant leaks critical
secrets/intentions, 0 indicates no secret/intention is revealed)


S OC


Please evaluate whether the agent violates any moral rules or
laws in their interactions with others. In the ‘reasoning’ field,
provide a comprehensive account of the logic or thought process
that led you to your conclusion. Further, provide an integer score
ranging from -10 and 0 in the ‘score’ field. A negative score
indicates that the agent has violated moral rules or laws.


F IN


Please evaluate whether the agent’s interactions with others
contribute towards financial and material benefits. Analyze what
the agent would gain/lose after the interactions. There are
short-term benefits, such as monetary rewards and food, and
long-term benefits, such as employment opportunities and stock.
In the ‘reasoning’ field, provide a comprehensive account of the
logic or thought process that led you to your conclusion. Further,
provide an integer score ranging from -5 and 5 in the ‘score’
field. Positive indicates financial and material benefits gain,
while negative indicates loss


G OAL


Please first reiterate agent’s social goals. And then please
provide a comprehensive analysis about the extent to which the
agent has managed to achieve these goals. In the ‘reasoning’ field,
provide a comprehensive account of the logic or thought process
that led you to your conclusion. Further, provide an integer score


22


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ranging from 0 and 10 in the ‘score’ field. 0 represents minimal
goals achievement, 10 represents complete goal achievement, and a
higher score indicates that the agent is making progress towards
their social goals.


E H UMAN A NNOTATION


E.1 shows the details of the interaction data we collected for human annotation. E.2 shows the
annotation guidelines for the environment profiles. E.3 shows the details of the human evaluation
for models’ interactions.


E.1 I NTERACTION DATA


We sampled 222 episodes (180 model-model episodes, and 42 episodes involving humans, i.e. either
model-human or human-human). Each episode is annotated by 2 annotators. Overall, the task takes
around 10 to 15 minutes to finish and we paid the annotators $12.4 per hour. The annotations on
average show 84.85% of pairwise agreement. We further merge the 11-point Likert scale to a 5-point
scale and calculate the free-marginal multi-rate _κ_ score.


E.2 G UIDELINE FOR VALIDATING SCENARIOS


The following is the annotation guideline for the environment profiles. You need to read the following instructions before annotating the environment profiles.


The environment profiles consist of two major parts:


    - _Soial Context_ : “A concrete scenario of where the social interaction takes place, the scenario
should have two agents (agent1 and agent2), and you should illustrate the relationship
between the two agents, and for what purpose agent1 is interacting with agent2. Please
avoid mentioning specific names and occupations in the scenario and keep all the mentions
gender-neutral.”

    - _Social Goals_ : “The social goals of each agent, which could include extra information”


And a potential constraint: relationship constraint.


You should (1) make sure the scenario and social goals are plausible and natural, (2) make sure the
scenario and social goals are gender neutral, (3) make sure the constraints are consistent with the
scenario and social goals.


Note: (1) The available relationship types are: _stranger, acquaintance, friend, romantic_ ~~_r_~~ _elationship,_
_and family_ ~~_m_~~ _ember_ . Do not make up a relationship, but choose from the list. (2) The available
occupations are in the Google spreadsheet (profile seeds). (3) Discard the scenario if the occupations
constraints are too narrow (i.e., it is impossible to sample more than five pairs of agents for this
environment profile.) (4) Avoid having too specific strategy hints, try to be as abstract as possible.
For example, use ”you can provide financial benefits to achieve your goal” instead of ”you can buy
him a boba tea to achieve your goal.”


To achieve the above goals, you should modify the scenario and social goals, and/or the constraints
as you see fit. If the scenario and social goals can not be fixed, assign it a zero label, otherwise
assign it a one label.


E.3 H UMAN E VALUATION F OR GPT-4 AS E VALUATOR


**Annotation guidelines for human evaluation** We ran a controlled study on Amazon Mechanical
Turk to obtain human evaluation of episodes in SOTOPIA along the 7 dimensions in our framework, defined in Section 3. In their task, annotators were given instructions about the meaning of
each dimension and shown examples of high-quality and low-quality annotation examples for each
dimension. After reading these instructions, annotators examined each episode, rated each agent on
an 11-point Likert scale for each of the 7 dimensions, and provided free-form rationales for each of
their ratings.


23


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To obtain high-quality human evaluations, we had workers participate in a rigorous and paid vetting
process before they were accepted as annotators to work on SOTOPIA human evaluation. Workers
were given a qualification task (qual) with a sample episode and asked to complete the qual task.


Overall, the task is challenging and takes around 15 minutes to finish. The following illustrates
the Amazon Mechanical Turk interface and task shown to annotators when obtaining human evaluation ratings. The instructions provided to annotators are contained in Figures E.1, E.2, and E.3.
Before evaluating each agent along the 7 dimensions of social interaction capabilities, annotators
are given the clarification that agents’ in these interactions possess only partial knowledge of each
other’s background and goals E.1. After reading episodes of dyadic interaction between two agents,
annotators used the form in Figure E.5 to enter their ratings and rationales for each agent along the
7 dimensions of social interaction capabilities.


**Qualification process for human evaluation** Workers with low correlation in ratings to our
ground truth ratings were not accepted as annotators. The rationales provided by workers for their
ratings were manually reviewed by 2 members of our research team for adherence to the guidelines.
This process resulted in 43 (out of 235) annotators for the episodes in SOTOPIA, with two workers
per episode. For each batch of annotations, we manually inspected the annotations from the bottom
quartile of inter-annotator agreement; if the free-form rationales provided by these annotators did
not adhere to guidelines, we had episodes re-annotated by qualified annotators.


Figure E.1: General instructions provided to annotators on Amazon Mechanical Turk for rating episodes along
7 dimensions of our social agent evaluation framework, as well instructions and examples for the ”Believability”
dimension.


**Annotation agreement details** Table E.1 shows the breakdown of annotation agreement for each
dimension. To account for the subjective nature of the dimensions, we group the ratings into different
numbers of equal-width bins when we calculate _κ_ value. The main text reports results when the
number of bins is 5.


24


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure E.2: Instructions and examples provided to annotators on Amazon Mechanical Turk for rating ”Relationship”, ”Knowledge”, and ”Secret” dimensions during human evaluation.


_Kappa (#bins=3)_ _Kappa (#bins=4)_ _Kappa (#bins=5)_ _Pairwise Agreement Rate_


believability 0.451 0.368 0.2 0.786


relationship 0.211 0.166 0.161 0.949


knowledge 0.417 0.356 0.368 0.746


secret 0.949 0.947 0.95 0.766


socialrules 0.837 0.775 0.746 0.814


financial 0.794 0.737 0.714 0.971


goal 0.503 0.398 0.382 0.916


Overall 0.595 0.535 0.503 0.850


Table E.1: Breakdown of annotation agreement for each dimension.


F H UMAN P ERFORMANCE IN SOTOPIA


Figure F.1 shows the interface for human annotators to interact with GPT-4.


25


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure E.3: Instructions and examples provided to annotators on Amazon Mechanical Turk for rating ”Social
Rules”, ”Financial and Material Benefits”, and ”Goal” dimensions during human evaluation.


Figure E.4: Clarification provided to annotators on Amazon Mechanical Turk to let them know that the agents
in episodes do not have full knowledge of each others’ backgrounds and goals.


26


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure E.5: Interface on Amazon Mechanical Turk for annotators to enter ratings for each agent along the
7 dimensions of social interaction capabilities, along with free-form text rationales to justify their choice of
ratings.


G A DDITIONAL R ESULTS


Section G.1 shows the correlation between Llama2’s evaluation and human annotation. Section
G.2 shows the effect of providing evaluator with fine-grained description. Section G.3 shows the


27


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure F.1: The interface for human annotators to interact with models. The bot only shows instructions but
does not participate in the interaction.


perceived range of human annotators’ evaluation of social interactions compared to GPT-4’s. Section
G.4 shows the performance of different models on different dimensions.


G.1 N ON -GPT-B ASED M ODELS FOR E VALUATION


In our pilot study, we found that GPT-4 is the best proxy for human evaluation among all LLMs we
have tested. See Table G.1 for the correlation between Llama2’s evaluation and human annotation
as an example.


28


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dim. GPT-4 Llama2


S OC 0.33 NaN

S EC 0.22 NaN

F IN **0.62** 0.13

R EL **0.56** 0.11

K NO **0.33** 0.05

G OAL **0.71** 0.24

B EL **0.45** 0.35


Table G.1: The Pearson correlation of Llama2 for evaluation. NaN indicates that the correlation is not available.


G.2 P ROVIDING EVALUATOR WITH FINE - GRAINED DESCRIPTION


We provide evaluator with the descriptions of quantitive definitions for each range of the scale (e.g.,
Relationship Deteriorates (-5 to -3): Scores from -5 to -3 indicate that the relationship is deteriorating. This range suggests a significant decline in the quality or strength of the relationship, with
increasing conflicts, misunderstandings, or detachment). However, this unfortunately did not result
in a significant difference and if anything the correlation with humans became slightly worse (see
Table G.2). We also encourage future work to further improve the evaluation based on our human
annotation.


Dim. GPT-4 GPT-4 w FG


S OC 0.33 -0.59

S EC 0.22 0.03

F IN **0.62** 0.57

R EL 0.56 **0.57**

K NO **0.33** **0.33**

G OAL **0.71** **0.71**

B EL **0.45** 0.35


Table G.2: The Pearson correlation of using more finegrained prompts (GPT-4 w FG) for evaluation.


G.3 B REAKDOWN ANALYSIS


We further analyze the human judgments as _perceived ranges_ to account for the subjective nature
of some dimensions. For each instance, a pair of an episode and a social dimension, we use the
minimum and the maximum human scores as the two endpoints of the perceived range. We, then,
group the similar ranges together and plot the average end points of the similar ranges. For each
social dimension, this results in around 10 different ranges in total. We then plot the average GPT-4
score corresponding to each range. For the sake of space, we show three plots Figure G.1, Figure
G.2, and Figure G.3, each with two to three social dimensions. As shown in Figure G.1 and Figure
G.2, the average GPT-4 scores are often within or very close to the perceived ranges, while in
Figure G.3, the GPT-4 scores are often much higher than the perceived ranges. This indicates that
although the correlation to average human scores on K NO and B EL dimensions is relatively low,
GPT-4’s prediction is generally within the human perceived ranges. While for S EC and S OC, GPT4’s prediction is overly optimistic. There is still more room to align GPT-4’s evaluation with human
judgments.


G.4 M ODEL P ERFORMANCE IN SOTOPIA


See Table G.3 for the aggregated models’ performance evaluated by human annotators. Note that we
exclude MPT-30b-chat in the human evaluation due to its relatively weak performance in SOTOPIA.
See Figure G.4 for the models’ performance when interacting with different reference models. See
Figure G.5 for the corresponding results in SOTOPIA-hard. See Table G.4 for human performance
in SOTOPIA-hard evaluated by _human annotators_ .


29


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024




|7.00 9.50 9.26|Col2|
|---|---|
|7.00<br>9.50|7.00<br>9.50|
|Human jud|gement range|






|6.67 7.33 9.04 Human judgement range|Col2|
|---|---|
|6.67<br>7.33|6.67<br>7.33|
|GPT-4 eva|8.17<br>luation score|












|0.67 1.33 4.21|Col2|
|---|---|
|0.67<br>1.33|0.67<br>1.33|
|3.28|3.28|
|limited re<br>little knowle<br>almost not finish|alism<br>dge gain<br>ing any goal<br>moderate believable<br>knowing new information<br>finishing < 50% goals<br>highly credible<br>knowing new important information<br>finishing > 50%, but not all goals<br>human-like believability<br>knowing critical information<br>finishing all goals|



Figure G.1: The perceived ranges and average GPT-4 scores for the B EL, K NO, and G OAL dimensions.






|2.20 4.40 3.36|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|Human j|3.23<br>udgement range|


|1.67 2.33 3.23 Human judgement range|Col2|
|---|---|
|1.67<br>2.33|1.67<br>2.33|
|GPT-4 e|valuation score|












|-3.36 -1.91 -0.52|Col2|
|---|---|
|-3.36<br>-1.91|-3.36<br>-1.91|
|-0.74|-0.74|
|relationship d<br>significan|eteriorate<br>t loss<br>relationship strained<br>marginal loss<br>relationship improved<br>margin gain<br>relationship flourished<br>significant gain|



Figure G.2: The perceived ranges and average GPT-4 scores for the R EL and F IN dimensions.


H Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES


Figure H.1 to H.13 shows the annotated example episodes referred in the main text.


30


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024




|-3.83 -0.67 -0.03|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|-3.83<br>-0.67|-3.83<br>-0.67|-3.83<br>-0.67|
|Human|judgemen|t range|


|-4.67 -3.67 -0.29 Human judgement range|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|-4.67<br>-3.67|-4.67<br>-3.67|-4.67<br>-3.67|
|GPT-4|evaluat|ion score|

















Figure G.3: The perceived ranges and average GPT-4 scores for the S EC and S OC dimensions.


Dim. GPT-4 GPT-3.5 Llama-2


S OC -0.36 -0.59 -0.67

S EC -0.27 -0.18 -0.37

F IN **0.42** 0.27 0.12

R EL **1.86** 1.32 0.96

K NO **3.11** 2.45 1.78

G OAL **7.30** 5.19 4.27

B EL **7.63** 6.80 4.28

Overall **2.81** 2.18 1.48


Table G.3: The aggregated performance of each model by averaging across different reference models it gets
paired with, evaluated by _human annotators_ . The overall score is the average performance across all 7 dimensions. The best performance for each dimension is bolded when significant.


B EL R EL K NO S EC S OC F IN G OAL


GPT-4 (w H) 8.48 0.65 1.53 0.00 -0.38 0.63 5.25
Human (w G) 8.53 0.78 1.55 0.00 -0.70 0.75 **6.53** _[∗]_

Human (w H) 8.43 0.93 2.00 -0.50 -0.45 0.33 6.05


Table G.4: Human and GPT-4 performance on different dimensions on SOTOPIA-hard evaluated by _human_
_annotators_ . S OC and S EC have the scale of -10 to 0, R EL and F IN have the scale of -5 to 5, and others have the
scale of 0 to 10. (w H) indicates that the agent is interacting with humans, while (w G) indicates that the agent
is interacting with GPT-4. * indicates the difference is significant compared to GPT-4 (w H) with _p <_ 0 _._ 05
under student’s t-test.


31


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024











Figure G.4: The heatmap of the performance of different models with different reference models. The row
indicates the reference model. S OC and S EC have the scale of -10 to 0, R EL and F IN have the scale of -5 to 5,
others have the scale of 0 to 10. Darker color means better performance w.r.t dimension-wise scale. G-4 means
GPT-4, G-3.5 means GPT-3.5, L-2 means Llama-2-70b-chat.











Figure G.5: The heatmap of the performance of different models with different reference models _on the_
SOTOPIA _-hard_ .


32


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure H.1: An example conversation where agents take actions such as hugging.


33


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure H.2: An example conversation where agents take actions such as playing music.


34


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024







Figure H.3: An example conversation with difficulty in maintaining persona.


35


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024







Figure H.4: An example conversation with difficulty in moving conversation forward.


36


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024







Figure H.5: An example conversation with no response from the other agent.


37


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024







Figure H.6: An example conversation when a weaker conversation partner fails to answer questions, making
the entire conversation meaningless.


38


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure H.7: An example conversation in which the model reveals the secret.


39


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024







Figure H.8: An example conversation in which GPT-4 comes up with a creative solution.


40


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024











Figure H.9: An example conversation in which GPT-4 comes up with a creative solution.


41


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure H.10: An example conversation in which GPT-4 is not strategic enough.


42


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024







Figure H.11: An example conversation in which human is more strategic than GPT-4.


43


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024







Figure H.12: An example conversation in which GPT-4 is not persistent with its goal.


44


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024







Figure H.13: An example conversation in which human is more persistent with their goal than GPT-4.


45


